Dream Control 

Lucidity & Control 

In dreams, you have the potential for full unlimited control! You can change the weather, 
freeze time, move mountains, shapeshift into creatures or other people, give yourself 
superpowers, visit any location, spawn any person or object, and even go to fictional 
universes. The list goes on! You can do anything in a dream. Lucidity is the first step, but 
lucidity is not synonymous with dream control. These are two different things! Lucidity 
strictly only refers to the awareness that you are dreaming, while dream control is its 
own separate mechanism.. You can be 100% lucid (aware that you are dreaming) without 
controlling the dream in any way. 

An uncontrolled lucid dream will progress naturally in the same way as a non-lucid dream, 
though your awareness may influence the dream in some ways (for example, dream 
characters may acknowledge that their existence is your dream). Otherwise, there is no 
difference between lucid and non-lucid dreams. Dream formation operates the same way 
for both, whether you are aware or unaware of the dreamstate. 

Dream control is its own separate mechanism from lucidity, which is based on the unique 
physics of dream formation (how your dreams are created, which is on an automatic 
subconscious level by default). Like a magic system, you can learn how to control 
dream formation consciously through training, but it doesn't come naturally to most 
lucid dreamers. Even natural lucid dreamers (who have been lucid dreaming for years, 
even decades) often suffer from poor dream control because they lack understanding of 
dream physics, which results in the perceived inability to control their dreams. 

So whether you're a beginner to lucid dreaming or a natural who has been practicing lucid 
dreaming for years, this guide contains helpful information on how to work with dream 
physics and fully master your dreams on every level. As you will learn, dream 'magic' is 
rooted in the mechanics of how dreams form naturally, which are not naturally on a 
conscious level, but can become conscious if you understand them. Dream formation is 
not random. When you learn the underlying system at play, you will be able to not only 
predict your dreams, but change their outcome. There are several factors involved and your 
unique psychology that play a role, but the mechanism behind how they work is universal 
to all dreamers. 

The Natural Trap 

Interestingly, natural lucid dreamers (those who learn lucid dreaming on their own without 
techniques or guides) are often the most plagued by dream control issues. If you have not 
learned dream control and have not verified your experiences with other dreamers, you 
may fall into a trap of assuming that your experiences are universal for all other dreamers. 
This may lead to false beliefs about dreams. For example, thinking that blinking in a dream 
will wake you up (this is not true) or that monsters will appear in dream mirrors (also not 

 
 
 
true). 

One of the fundamentals of dream control is repetition—when you experience the same 
scenario in a dream more than once, especially over the course of years, subsequent 
dreams will follow the same pattern through nothing more than learned habit. This is due to 
how we evolved to understand the laws of cause and effect in physical reality. If you put 
your hand into an alligator's mouth, you might get bit, so you'll tell yourself not to do that 
again. Good call! This ability to learn cause and effect serves us well in physical reality, but 
cause and effect does not exist in dreams. Sticking your hand in an alligator's mouth in a 
dream could result in anything. You could get bit the first time, but the next time you do it, 
the alligator could spit up a whole pepperoni pizza, or another hand could reach out from 
its throat and shake your hand. 

Using dream control, you can choose which patterns to engage in. Spawning people by 
reaching into the mouths of alligators could be your special dream power if you choose. 
The more you get used to any specific pattern (through repetition), the more it will develop 
as an automatic dream sequence (your dreams will start to automatically follow any 
pattern you train yourself to repeat).  

Do dreams have to be controlled? 

It's worth acknowledging that dream control is optional. Whether you're lucid or non-
lucid, there's no rule saying you must control the dream. If you don't practice any forms of 
dream control, you can let a lucid dream unfold on its own. Dream characters will often act 
of their own volitions just like normal dream people, scenes will develop on their own 
without you needing to think about them, and scenarios will move forward naturally with or 
without your conscious direction. You can exercise as much or as little control over the 
dream as you'd like. You may be surprised by where these plots go! Sit back and enjoy the 
ride. 
Uncontrolled lucid dreams can be great fun. Many advanced lucid dreamers enjoy sitting 
back and letting their dreams roam freely, only controlling bits and pieces of the narrative 
when it suits them. Completely uncontrolled dreams can lead to unpleasant experiences, 
but you can always change those parts and leave the rest if you like.  

The Anti-control Myth 

Dream control can be used to stop nightmares (which can translate to better moods in 
waking life). This is often stigmatized due to the assumption that we must allow our dreams 
to play out undisturbed. While it's true that nightmares and unpleasant dreams can help us 
process and cope with everyday stressers, letting them repeat indefinitely isn't necessary, 
nor is it healthy. Having them temporarily during periods of stress is normal and healthy, 
but repeating negative patterns endlessly after the source if the stress is gone isn't. 

Allowing your nightmares to be needlessly relentless and excessive is like allowing a dog to 
panic at the door every time a visitor comes over. As humans, we're aware of things that 

 
 
 
dogs are not privy to (we're lucid while the dog is non-lucid). Using our lucidity, we teach 
dogs not to panic in response to friendly guests. The same process takes place when we 
use our awareness to teach ourselves not to panic unnecessarily when there is nothing to 
be stressed about. Dream control can bring a great deal of joy and positivity to your life by 
training you to feel safe in your own mind. After all, if you can't feel safe in your own mind, 
how are you supposed to feel safe in waking life? You cannot escape your mind. Even when 
you are awake, you are still experiencing your inner world at all times (in this way, you are 
always dreaming). 

Controlling Non-lucid Dreams 

Lucidity is recommended for control, but is not required! Non-lucid dreams can be 
controlled as well, usually from outside of the dream using incubation techniques. 
Lucid dreaming gives you the ability to control dreams in real time with instant feedback 
from within the dream, but any dream can benefit from waking incubation. Skip to the 
incubation section of this guide if you're interested in controlling non-lucid dreams.  

Control Methods 

Straightforward Commands 

The most obvious way to control lucid dreams is through straightforward commands such 
as directly telling a dream what you want. For example, you can snap your fingers to spawn 
a dream character, point at a bird in the sky to turn it into an airplane, become invisible just 
by thinking it will happen, spawn an apple into your hand, or look up and fly away. These 
straightforward means of dream control can work quickly and effectively simply 
through intent and expectation, knowing that you're in a dream and can therefore do 
whatever you want. 

Straightforrward commands can be very effective. They work best when the dreamer is 
unencumbered by underlying fears or doubts or when a task has already been repeated in 
dreams before (the more you do something in a dream, the more it turns into a habitual 
expectation (and therefore comes naturally to you). For example, if you routinely fly over 
mountains in your dreams, then you will most likely keep doing it (unless you make a 
conscious decision not to). 

Sometimes straightforward control gets overpowered by natural dream formation, resulting 
in the attempted command to fail. For example, spawning a giraffe on land is more likely to 
work than spawning one in water. Underwater giraffes can be spawned(it is a dream, after 
all), especially if spawning underwater giraffes is something you trained yourself to do 
repeatedly. However, dreams naturally form based on associations that make sense, and 
underwater giraffe don't make the most sense. Even though anything is possible in 
dreams, your mind naturally clings to patterns of associations that make sense. You 
expect water to be wet and for giraffes to not be swimming in it. 

 
 
 
Cnfidence is a key component to straightforward commands. With unbound confidence, 
you can overpower any association. Having good experiences with successfully controlling 
your dreams is a good way to train your confidence, allowing one success to lead to 
another. On the flip side, lack of confidence can lead to a vicious cycle of failed attempts at 
straightforward commands. You may repeatedly snap your fingers and find that nothing 
happens. One of the ways you can fix this is to  

If you still struggle with straightforward commands and feel as though you cannot control 
your dreams no matter what command you use, it's recommended that you stop 
attempting straightforward commands and work on other methods of dream control 
instead. Strengthen your confidence with other methods of control, then come back 
to doing commands. This may take a single success or multiples, but it will set you up for 
longterm success with commands. Even though failing to control your dreams isn't a 
permanent problem, feelings of frustration and lack of control can manifest in dreams 
as failed commands because that's how your dream processes frustration and 
perceived lack of control.  

Schematic Control 

Schemas are frameworks of associations between concepts in your mind, similar to a 
spiderweb. You are the spider crawling across the web, moving from association to 
association. As you move through your dream web, you spin more webbing. Every place 
you travel in the dream becomes a reinforced route. New connections can be made, or 
older ones can be reinforced. This is how dreams form and evolve into a more cohesive 
reality (dreamers naturally develop more common themes in their dreams the more they 
engage the dream life, which can lead to natural development of lucidity). 

Schemas as an excellent stepping stones in developing longterm dream control skills, as 
you build your own web the way you want it. Developing your schematic associations 
makes straightforward dream control easier and more automatic. So if you're having 
any issues with straightforward control, learning how to use schematic associations can 
help! This is part of how longterm dream control skills are developed. 

So how do dreams form naturally? Lucid dreams form in the same way as non-lucid 
dreams, first of all. There is no difference in the fundamental mechanics of dream 
formation. It's only the dream contents that might differ between lucid and non-lucid 
dreams, and your ability to control things in the moment. 

As you enter a dream, your mind will automatically come up with scenarios that lead into 
each other scenarios through your personal associations and expectations for how reality 
works. For example, if you see a dog, you'll expect the dog to bark rather than talk like a 
human. Barking dogs are common. If you had a dog who didn't bark much or at all, a dream 

 
 
 
 
 
dog might bark less for you than someone else's dream dog. Your dream dog could even 
talk like a human if you're engaging in a certain way that brings up a potential talking dog 
schema (such as starting a conversation with the dog, being in a setting that reminds you of 
a talking dog movie, or by simply knowing that you're in a dream in which dogs can talk). 
Your dream dog might be likely to talk more if you watch a lot of talking dog movies, versus 
the less talkative dream dogs of a person who doesn't watch talking dog movies... Exposure 
to the association reinforces it. The dog could also neigh like a horse if you're exposed 
enough to that association, but barking (and even talking dog) schemas are more common 
for most people than dogs neighing like horses. 

To use schemas for dream control, get to know yourself and your own personal 
associations. With that knowledge about yourself, take advantage of your current 
environment or something that you already have control over. For example, if you want 
to spawn a favorite food, but it won't automatically appear in your hand with 
straightforward control, you can walk into a restaurant that serves that food and find it 
there. Because dream formation is based on associations and expectations, you'll be likely 
to get what you want by walking across that schematic web. 

Here's some more examples: 

- To spawn a specific person, call them on the phone, invite them over, or lure them with 
their favorite activities. 

- To change your location, walk through a door, climb through a window, hop on a bus, or 
turn around a corner. 

- To fly, turn into something that flies (like a bird) or raise your fist into the air like a 
superhero. 

By working with your mental associations, you can naturally move along the web of your 
dream. It helps to take notes of schemas that you notice already being in your past dreams, 
as you can use these thought patterns and observe the outcomes. Getting to know 
yourself on this deeper level is a learning process, and also translates to waking life 
thought patterns. Schemas in dreams are the way our minds think and process 
information, so you can learn many things about yourself and change those thought 
patterns permanently through lucid dream control. You can remove undesirable patterns 
by disengaging from them, and develop new schemas by practicing repetition of the 
desired associations. 

Click here for the complete schema guide.  

Disregarding Cause & Effect 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cause and effect don't actually exist in dreams the way we're used to in waking life. It's 
a great tool for schematic association, but disregarding cause and effect, and the laws of 
time as a whole, is another powerful way to master your dreams. 

There's no such thing as past or future in dreams. Everything exists in the present moment. 
You've probably heard this before in religions, philosophies, or spirituality—but it applies to 
dream control in a literal way. So, for even more powerful results, assume the reality you 
want in the present-moment,  

Avoid Dangling Carrot Effect 

Just like how cause and effect in dreams doesn't exist the way we're used to in waking, 
future events also don't exist in dreams. One of the most common errors made by 
beginners is to apply dream control onto future events, which will never actually happen 
because there is no future experience. Experience exist moment-by-moment in the present 
time. This can cause a dangling carrot effect in dreams, with the desired outcome 
being in the wrong time, and therefore inaccessible. 

Phrases like I will spawn a carrot or I will fly come with underlying implications of a future-
oriented mindset. You imagine that something will happen at any moment in the future, 
instead of assuming that it is happening right now in the present. This is a subtle detail in 
phrasing, but the underlying mindset is profound and has powerful influence on dream 
control. 

So make sure your mindset is geared towards the present, not the future. If you want to 
spawn a carrot in your hand, use a present-tense mindset such as There IS a carrot in my 
hand right now. rather than There WILL be a carrot in my hand—because you don't exist in 
the will be, you exist in the right now. Right now is where you want the carrot to exist. 

Disclaimer: You can still use I will and there will be phrasing. The phrasing itself is fine. It's 
the mindset implications underlying the phrasing that benefits from being present-tense 
oriented. Changing your phrasing to present tense can help align your mindset, but just 
aligning your mindset with present-tense itself works too. 

Waking Incubation 

Dreams can also be controlled via planning and dream incubation while awake. This is 
best done right before going to sleep, but it can also be done any time throughout the day. 
One of the best ways to incubate dreams is through mnemonics, using the same process 
as the MILD technique for lucid dreaming. But, instead of using MILD to cause lucidity, you 
can use it to cause anything to happen in dreams. 

Waking incubation is recommended for control of non-lucid dreams, since they can't be 
controlled in the moment like lucid dreams can. It's also recommended to reinforce lucid 
dream control because schematic associations can be reinforced at any time, even while 

 
 
 
 
 
awake. 

There are also ways of planning recurring dreams called persistent realms, providing you 
with long-lasting dream control spanning multiple dreams. 

 
 

DEILD 

DEILD stands for Dream Exit Initiated Lucid Dream. DEILD is also sometimes called 
"Dream Chaining." A DEILD is basically a shortened WILD. DEILD has the potential to let 
you have multiple lucid dreams each night. This technique takes advantage of the fact that 
as you awaken from a dream the brain remains in dream mode for a few moments, 
provided you don't move too much. Since your brain is still using REM waves, you can easily 
slip back into a dream without having to trick your body into falling asleep. However, if you 
are at the end of a REM phase you won't be able to DEILD. If you hit the right timing and are 
able to keep yourself conscious while you drift back to sleep, you'll find that it's relatively 
easy to enter in a dream lucid. 
. 

Background 

The DEILD technique had been around for a while. Many lucid dreamers have stumbled 
across this technique in their own in their pursuit of LDs. Dr. Steven LaBerge outlined this 
technique in some of his books. 

Preparation. 

Dream Recall 

In order to DEILD you have to have good dream recall. Not only so you won't forget your 
DEILD adventures, but also because you need to be aware enough of your dreams that you 
know when one has just ended. It is ideal to establish decent dream recall since it can be 
much easier to reenter the dream if it is still clearly recalled once you wake up, as opposed 
to visualizing a completely new one (which you may also do if you prefer). 
. 

Awakening After a Dream 

Since DEILD relies on your ability to wake up as a dream ends, you obviously need to be 
able to do this on a regular basis. Many people wake up briefly after each dream already, 
but are unaware of it. There a few ways to become aware of these awakenings: 

- Some people use an alarm of some kind to wake them up during the night. A vibrating cell 
phone can be used, too. You will need an alarm that turns itself off after a few seconds. The 
shorter the duration of the alarm the better, as you don't want it to disturb you too much. 
Set it to go off after between 3-6 hours of sleep. You'll have to experiment to find the best 
time for you. If you want, you can also set it to go off every half hour after that, to give you a 

 
 
 
 
 
 
greater chance of waking from a dream. 

- Some people train themselves to recognize the look of their closed eyes, because this will 
signal that they have just woken up. To do this close your eyes while going to sleep for the 
night. Spend about a minute looking at the backs of your eyelids. Over time you should 
start to instantly recognize, even when groggy and half-awake, that your eyes are closed 
and that is a signal that you have just woken from a dream.  

If you don't like the idea of an alarm waking you up you can try going to bed a couple of 
hours early. Many people find this causes them to wake up during the night more than they 
normally do. 

Another way to skip the alarm is to use autosuggestion. With this method you come up with 
a short sentence or phrase (your "mantra") that sums up your desire, in this case to be 
aware of waking up after every dream. An example of a mantra you can use is, "I will be 
aware of waking after every dream." To get the most out of autosuggestion repeat your 
mantra over and over several times a day. The more you do it the faster and better it will 
work. A good way to make sure you do it enough is to repeat it: 

•  Every time, the whole time as you use the bathroom. 

•  Whenever you wait in line or have other "down" time. 

•  Whenever you walk through a doorway. 

•  As you get ready for bed. 

•  For several minutes as you lay in bed. 

How to DEILD. 

Once your dream recall is good and you are aware of waking after many of your dreams you 
are ready to start DEILDing! When done properly the whole process generally takes less 
than a minute from awake to a lucid dream state. 

You awake after in a dream. Now try to hold still and avoid if possible opening your eyes. 
Even though scratching your nose or moving a bit does not end your chances, excessive 
wakefulness can cause your brain to come out of REM. You need to keep your mind awake, 
but still in that dreamy, in-between state.  

Now a dream will form around you. At this stage you may feel some Hypnagogic 
Hallucinations, since DEILD is a kind of WILD. 
. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hints on Staying Still 

• 

If you find it is hard for you to remember to stay still as you awake you can use 
autosuggestion to plant that goal in your mind. 

•  Another useful way of staying still is to set two alarms, one fifteen minutes or so 

before you attempted to DEILD. When it goes off, go back to sleep, but affirm that 
next time you wake up you will stay still. Because you did your affirmation so closely 
to the DEILD attempt, it is very fresh and your mind. 

. 

Hints on Entering the Dream 

•  You can enter a dream scenario of your choice by imagining it while you lay still 

waiting for the dream to form. This is harder to do than dream reentry. 

•  You can reenter your last dream by simply thinking about it. Most people find this 

the easiest way to shape a dream while DEILDing. 

• 

If you are more of a tactile person, you can imagine the sensation of movement or of 
touching something to help you get into a dream. As an added bonus, when you 
actually can "feel" the movement or object you know your dream body is feeling it 
and you are in the dream. This acts as a built in RC. 

•  Be aware of the false awakenings. Most WILDs will start with one. If you think you've 

failed the DEILD, make sure with a reality check. 

. 

Chaining 

Many people use DEILD not as a technique to become lucid, but as a method for staying 
lucid. Dreamers (especially ones who are new to lucid dreaming) tend to wake up soon 
after becoming lucid. The DEILD technique allows the dreamer to go back into the dream 
and continue it. The way to perform is right when you realize that the dream is about to end. 
You might know this depending on the time you started your DEILD, or if you can't seem to 
prevent the scenario from fading. At this point, you want to focus on your intention of 
waking up and remaining motionless, while also keeping focus on any dream imagery 
residue that might allow you the opportunity to enter in the next dream. 

 
 
 

Perceptual and  Motor Skills, 1981, 52,  727-732.  @ Perceptual  and Motor  Skills  1981 

LUCID  DREAMING  VERIFIED  BY  VOLITIONAL  COMMUNICATION ' 
DURING  REM  SLEEP1 

STEPHEN  P.  LABERGE,  LYNN  E.  NAGEL,  WILLIAM  C.  DEMENT, 
A N D   VINCENT  P.  ZARCONE,  JR. 

Stanford University 

Summary.-The 

occurrence  of  lucid  dreaming  (dreaming while  being  con- 
scious  that  one  is  dreaming)  has  been  verified  for  5  selected  subjects  who 
signaled  that  they  knew  they  were  dreaming  while  continuing to  dream  during 
unequivocal  REM  sleep.  The  signals  consisted  of  particular  dream  actions 
having  observable  concomitants  and  were  performed  in  accordance  with  pre- 
sleep  agreement.  The  ability  of  proficient  lucid  dreamers  to  signal  in  this 
manner  makes possible  a  new  approach  to  dream  research-such 
subjects,  while 
lucid,  could  carry  out  diverse  dream  experiments  marking  the  exact  time  of 
particular  dream  events,  allowing  derivation  of  precise  psychophysiological 
correlations  and  methodical  testing  of  hypotheses. 

That  we  sometimes dream  while  knowing  that  we  are dreaming  was  first 
noted  by -Aristotle.  According  to  accounts  of  conscious  or  "lucid"  dreaming, - 
as  this phenomenon  is  commonly  termed,  the dreamer  can  possess  a  conscious- 
ness  fully  comparable  in  coherence,  clarity,  and  cognitive  complexity  to  that 
of  the  waking  state,  while  continuing  to  dream  vividly  (Van  Eeden,  1913; 
Brown,  1936;  Green,  1968;  Tart,  1979;  LaBerge,  1980b).  As  a  result  of 
theoretical  assumptions  about  the  nature  of  dreaming,  contemporary  dream  re- 
searchers  have  questioned  whether  these  experiences  take  place  during  sleep 
or  during  brief  periods  of  hallucinatory  wakefulness.  The  purpose  of  the 
present  study  was  to give an empirical  answer  to  this  question  by  determining 
the  physiological  conditions  in  which  lucid  dreaming  occurs. 

Our experimental approach  was suggested  by  previous  investigations  (An- 
trobus,  et  al.,  1965;  Salamy,  1970; Brown  & Cartwright,  1978), showing  that 
sleeping  subjects  are  sometimes  able  to  produce  behavioral  responses  highly 
correlated  with  dreaming.  Since  these  subjects  have  not,  according  to  Cart- 
wright  (1978), been  conscious  of  making  the  responses,  these  earlier  studies 
do  not  provide  evidence  for  voluntaty  action  (and  thus,  reflective  conscious- 
ness)  during  sleep.  However,  we  reasoned  that  what  could  be  done  uncon- 
sciously could  also  be  done  consciously. 

The  experience  of  one  of  us  (S.P.L.)  indicated  that,  if  subjects  became 
aware  they  were  dreaming,  they  could  also  remember  to  perform  previously 

'The  writing  of  this  manuscript  was  supported,  in  part,  by  the  Holmes  Center  for  Re- 
search  in  Holistic  Healing.  W e  are  grateful  to  Drs.  J.  van  den  Hoed  and  R.  Coleman 
for  h e l ~ f u l  comments  and  Mr.  R.  Baldwin.  Ms.  S.  Bornstein,  and  Mr.  S.  Coburn  for 
expert  iechnical  assistance.  . Request  reprints  from  Stephen  P.  LaBerge,  Ph.D.,  Sleep 
Research  Center,  Stanford  University,  School  of  Medicine,  Stanford,  CA  94305. 

728 

S.,P.  LA  BERGE,  ET  AL. 

intended  dream  actions.  Because  dreamed  gaze  and  limb  actions  have  some- 
times  shown  very  good  corre!ations  with  polygraphically  recorded  eye  move- 
ments  and  muscle  activation  (Rechtschaffen,  1973),  it  seemed  plausible  that 
lucid  dreamers  could  signal  that  they  knew  they  were  dreaming  by  means  of 
intentional  dream  actions  having  observable  physiological  correlates. 

METHOD AND  RESULTS 

Five  subjects,  trained  in  the  method  of  lucid  dream  induction  (MILD) 
described  by  LaBerge  (1980c),  were  selected  on  the  basis  of  their  claimed 
ability to have  lucid dreams  on demand, and studied  for  2  to 20 nonconsecutive 
nights  (see  Table  1 ) .   Standard  polysomnograms  (Rechtschaffen  &  Kales, 
1968), i.e., electroencephalogram  (EEG) . electro-oculogram  (EOG ) , and  chin 
electromyogram  (EMG), were  recorded,  as  well  as  left  and  right  wrist  EMG 
(for  signaling).  The  subjects  attempted  to  follow  a  predetermined  procedure 
of  signaling  whenever  they  became  aware  that  they  were  dreaming.  A  variety 
of  signals  were  specified,  generally  consisting  of  a  combination  of  dreamed 
eye  movemehts  and  a  pattern  of  left  and  right  dream-fist  clenches.  The  sub- 
jects  demonstrated  the  signals  during pre-recording calibrations  but  were  asked 
not  to practice  further while  awake. 

In  the  course  of  the  study,  35  lucid  dreams  were  reported  subsequent  to 
spontaneous awakening  from ~ a r i o u s ' s t a ~ e s  of  sleep as  follows:  rapid-eye-move- 
ment  (REM)  sleep  in  32  cases,  non-REM  ( S R E M )   Stage  1 twice,  and  dur- 
ing  the  transition  from  NREM  Stage 2  to  REM  once. 

The  subjects  reported  signaling  during  30  of  these  lucid  dreams.  After 
each  recording,  the  reports  mentioning  signals  were  submitted  along  with  the 
respective  polysomnogram  to  a  judge  uninformed  of  the  times  of  the  reports. 

TABLE  1 
SUMMARY OF LUCID DREAM SIGNALING EXPERIMENTS 

Subject 
(age, sex ) 

Nights 
recorded 

Lucid  dreams  reported 
(sleep stage) 

Lucid  dream signals 
verified*/reported 

S.L.  (32 yr.,  M )  
R.K.  (28 yr.,  M )  
L.L.  (34 yr.,  F )  

B.K.  (27 yr.,  F )  

S.P.  (26 yr.,  M )  

20 
4 
2 

6 

2 

17  (REM) 
5  (REM) 
1  (REM) 
2  (NREM-1) 
6  (REM) 
1  (NREM-2/REM)  + + 
2  (REM) 

14/15 
3/5 
0 / 0  
0 + / 1  
5 / 6  
o/o 
2/2 

*Blindly  matched  for  correspondence  between  reporred  and  observed  signals. 
+On  awakening from NREM  Stage  1 sleep  ( 2  min.  after  having  awakened  from  REM), 
the  subject  reported  performing  the  agreed-upon  signal  during  a  vivid  and  lengthy  lucid 
dream.  However,  neither  her  EOG  nor  wrist  EMG  showed  any  sign  of  the  reported 
signals,  as  might  be  expected  from  the  normal  lack  of  correspondence  between  dream 
gaze  and  eye  movements  during  descending  Stage  1  sleep  (Rechtschaffen,  1973). 
+ +The  subject awoke,  in  this  case,  during  the  transition  from  NREM  Stage 2  to  REM. 

LUCID  DREAMING 

729 

The  judge  was  asked  to  determine  whether  one  (or  none)  of  the  polysom- 
In  24 
nographic  epochs  corresponded  with  the  reported  lucid  dream  signal. 
cases,  the  judge  was  able  to  select  the  appropriate  30-sec.  epochs  (out  of 
about  1000 per  polysomnogram)  on  the  basis  of  correspondence  between  re- 
ported  and  observed  signals  (Table  1 ) .   The  probability  that  the  selections 
were  correct  by  chance  alone  is  astronomically  small.  All  signals  associated 
with  lucid  dream  reports  occurred  during  epochs  of  unambiguous  REM  sleep 
scored  according to the standard  criteria  (Rechtschaffen  & Kales,  1968).  The 
lucid  dream  signals were  followed  by  an  average  of  1 min.  (range:  5  to  450 
sec.)  of  uninterrupted  REM  sleep. 

Inspection  of  the  polysomnographic  epochs  preceding  the  lucid  dream 
signal  reports  suggested  the  failures  with  blind  matching  (the  "false  nega- 
tives")  were  due  to  high  baseline  EOG  and  wrist  EMG  activity,  resulting  in 
an  unfavorable  signal-to-noise  ratio.  However,  no  clear  instances  of  signals 
were  observed  except  where  reported,  i.e.,  there  were  no  "false  positives."  On 
the other hand,  in many  cases, the  reported  signals  were  unequivocal  (see  Figs. 
1  and  2 ) .   The  most  reliable  signal  was  a  series  of  extreme  horizontal  eye 
movements  (left, right,  left,  right.) 

P 
h a  

L L L   L 

L L  

J 

1  " '  

I 

FIG. 1.  Polygraph  record of  a subject  signaling  that  he knows  he  is  dreaming.  The 
subject  awoke  approximately  20  sec.  after  this  excerpt  and  reported  recognizing  that  he 
was  dreaming  and  performing  the  agreed  upon  signal  in  the  dream,  i.e.,  he  directed  his 
dream gaze upwards  momentarily  ( U )   and  then  executed  a sequence of  dreamed  left  ( L )  
and  right  ( R )   fist  clenches, Morse  code  for  S.L., the  subject's  initials.  Note  that  unlike 
the  predominantly  horizontal  eye  movements  (above  right),  the  extreme  upward  eye 
movement  ( U )   produces  characteristic  artifact  in  the  EEG  channel.  All  three  of  the 
scoring  criteria  for  REM  sleep  are  met:  low  amplitude  chin  EMG,  episodic  REMs,  and 
low-voltage,  mixed-frequency  EEG  (Rechrschaffen  &  Kales,  1968).  The  EEG  shows 
occasional  10-Hz (alpha)  activity as  is  normal  during  REM  sleep  (Rechtschaffen,  1973); 
integration  of  the  alpha  band-pass  filtered  EEG  showed  the  amount  of  alpha  activity 
during the  lucid  dream  did  not  significantly  differ  from  that  during  the  preceding  non- 
lucid  portion  of  the  REM  period. 

(Calibrations:  50pV; 5  sec.) 

730 

S.  P.  LA  BERGE,  ET  AL. 

The most  complicated  signal  (shown  in  Fig.  1) consisted  of  a  single up- 
ward  dream-eye  movement  followed  by  a  series  of  left  (L)  and  right  ( R )  
dream-fist  clenches  in  the  order  "LLL  LRLL."  This  sequence  is  equivalent  to 
- 
the  subject's  initials  in  Morse  code  (LLL  = . . . = S;  LRLL  = . --  . . - 
L).  The complexity of  this  signal argues against  the possibility  that  the EMG 
discharges  might be  spontaneous. 

That  all  cases  of  lucid  dream  signaling  occurred  during  epochs  scored  as 
REM  sleep  specifies,  to  a  certain  extent,  the  physiology  of  lucid  dreaming  as 
"a  relatively  low  voltage,  mixed  frequency  EEG  in  conjunction  with  episodic 
REMs  and  low  amplitude  electromyogram  (EMG)"  (Rechtschaffen  & Kales, 
1968).  This  definition  allows  variation  in  the  three  parameters,  the  details 
of  which  will  be  reported  elsewhere. 
In  brief,  the variations  in the  EEG  pat- 
terns  of  the  lucid  dream  polysomnograms  were  typical  of  REM  sleep,  i.e., 
sporadic  "saw-tooth"  waves  as  well  as  alpha  and  theta  rhythm,  and  not  wake- 
fulness.  The  occasional,  but  normal,  appearance  of  alpha  rhythm  ( a   brain 
wave  usually  associated  with  wakefulness),  in  the  EEG  during  REM  periods 
raises  the  possibility  that  lucid  dreaming  could  occur  during  momentary  par- 
tial  arousals  or  "micro-awakenings"  (Schwartz  & Lefebvre,  1973).  However, 
alpha  rhythm  need  not  be  present  during  lucid  dream  signaling,  as  is  shown 
by  Fig.  2.  Furthermore,  some  of  the  lucid  dreams  were  several  minutes  long, 
ruling out any  explanation  based  on  the  notion  of  brief  intrusions  of  wakeful- 
ness. 

(A)  AWAKE 

(B)  LUCID  DREAM 

FIG. 2.  Comparison  of  EEG  (C3/A2)  .during  lucid  dream  signaling  ( B )   and  im- 
mediately  after  awakening  ( A ) .   The  continuous  waking  alpha  (10  Hz)  activity  for 
this  subject  is  clearly  distinct  from  the  mixed  frequency  patterns  during  REM  sleep. 
Although  other  EEG  paaerns  are  compatible  with  wakefulness, the  tracing  illustrated  is 
the  pattern  normally  exhibited  when  subjects  awaken  from  sleep.  The  2- to  4-Hz EEG 
activity  prominent  in  the  lucid  dream  sample  ( B )   is  highly  characteristic of  REM  sleep. 
(Calibrations:  50  pV;  1  sec.) 

How  do we  know  that  the  subjects  were  "really  asleep"  whe.n  they  com- 
If  we  allow  perception  of  the  external  world  as a 

municated  the  signals? 

DISCUSSION 

LUCID  DREAMING 

731 

criterion  of  being  awake,  we  can  conclude  the  subjects  were  indeed  asleep: 
Although  they  knew  they  were  in  the  laboratory,  this  knowledge  was  a  mat- 
ter  of  memory,  not  perception;  upon  awakening,  they  reported  having  been 
totally  in  the dream  world  and  not  in  sensory  contact  with  the  external  world. 
Neither  were  the  subjects  merely  not  attending  to  the  environment,  e.g.,  as 
when  absorbed  in reading or daydreaming;  according to  their reports, they  were 
specifically  aware of  the  absence  of  sensory  input  from  the  external  world. 
If 
subjects  were  to  claim  to  have  been  awake  while  showing  physiological  signs 
of  sleep,  or  vice  versa,  we  might  doubt  their  subjective  reports.  However,  in 
the present  case, the subjective accounts  and  physiological  measures  are  in  clear 
agreement,  and  it would  be  extremely  unparsimonious  to  suppose  that  subjects 
who  believed  themselves  to  be  asleep  while  showing  physiological  indications 
of  sleep were  actually  awake. 

The  two  principal  conclusions  of  this  study  are  that  lucid  dreaming  can 
occur  during  REM  sleep  and  that  it  is  possible  for  lucid  dreamers  to  signal 
intentionally  to  the  environment  while  continuing  to  dream.  These  findings 
have  both  theoretical  and  pfactical  consequences.  The  first  result  shows  that 
under  certain  circumstances,  dream  cognition  during  REM  sleep  can  be  much 
more  reflective  and  rational  than  has  been  commonly  assumed.  Evidence  in- 
dicating that  lucid  dreaming  is  a learnable  skill  (LaBerge,  1979, 1980a,  1980b, 
1980c),  taken  with  the  second  result,  suggests  the  feasibility  of  a  new  ap- 
proach  to  dream  research:  lucidly  dreaming  subjects  could  carry  out  diverse 
experiments  marking  the  exact  time  of  occurrence  of  particular  dream  events, 
which  would  allow  the  derivation  of  precise  psychophysiological  correlations 
and  methodical testing  of  hypotheses. 

REFERENCES 

ANTROBUS, J.  S.,  ANTROBUS, J.  S.,  &  FISHER, C.  Discriminarion of  dreaming  and  non- 

dreaming sleep.  Archives  of  General  Psychiutry,  1965,  12,  395-401. 

BROWN, A.  E.  Dreams  in  which  the  dreamer knows he  is  asleep.  Journal  o f  Abnormal 

and  Sock1  Psychology,  1936,  31,  59-66. 

BROWN, J.  N.,  &  CARTWRIGHT, R.  Locating  NREM  dreaming  through  instrumental 

responses.  Psychophysiology,  1978,  15,  35-39. 

CARTWRIGHT, R. 

[Response  to  review  of  Brown  and  Cartwright  (1978).] 

Sleep 

Reviews,  1978,  166,  30. 

GREEN, C.  Lucid  dreams.  London:  Hamilton,  1968. 
IABERGE, S.  Lucid  dreaming:.some  personal  observations.  Sleep  Research,  1979,  8, 

153. 

IABERGE, S.  P.  Induction  of  lucid  dreams.  Sleep  Research,  1980,  9,  138. 
LABERGE, S.  P.  Lucid  dreaming:  an  exploratory  study  of  consciousness  during  sleep. 
(University  Microfilms  International. 

( a )  

Ph.D. dissertation, Stanford Univer.,  1980. 
80-24,  691) 

( b )  

LABERGE, S. P.  Lucid  dreaming as  a learnable skill:  a case study.  Perceptual  and  Motor 

Skills.  1980.  51.  1039-1042. 

( c )  
.  . 

RECHTSCHAFFEN, A.  T h e  psychophysiology  of  mental  activity  during  sleep. 

In  F.  J. 

732 

S.  P.  LA  BERGE,  ET  AL. 

McGuigan  & R.  A.  Schoonover  (Eds.),  The psychophysiology  of thinking.  New 
York:  Academic  Press,  1973.  Pp.  153-200. 

RECHTSCHAFFEN, A.,  &  KALES, A.  (Eds.)  A  manual  of  standardized  terminology, 
techniques  and  scoring  system  for  sleep  stages  o f   human  subjects.  Washington, 
(National  Institute  of 
D.C.:  United  States  Government  Printing  Office,  1968. 
Health  Publication  No.  204) 

S A L A ~ ,  J.  Instrumental  responding  to  internal  cues  associated  with  REM  sleep.  Psy- 

chonomic  Science,  1970,  18,  342-343. 

SCHWARTZ, B.  A,,  &  LEFEBVRE, A.  Contacts  veille/P.M.O.  11:  Les  P.M.O.  morcelees. 
Revue  d'Electroencephalographie et  de  Nelrrophysiologie  Clinique,  1973,  3,  165- 
176. 

TART, C.  S.  From  spontaneous  event to lucidity:  a review  of  attempts to control  nocturnal 
In  B.  B.  Wolman  (Ed.),  Handbook  of  dreams.  New  York:  Van 

dreaming. 
Nostrand  Reinhold,  1979.  Pp.  226-268. 

VANEEDEN, F.  A.  A  study  of  dreams.  Proceedings  of the  Society  for Psychical  Research. 
[Reprinted  in  C.  T.  Tart  (Ed.),  Altered  states  of  conscious- 

1913,  26,  431-461. 
ness.  New York:  Wiley,  1969.  Pp.  145-1581 

Accepted  April  7 ,  1981. 


Mnemonic Induction of Lucid Dreams (MILD) 
(From “Exploring the World of Lucid Dreaming” by Stephen LaBerge) 

Ten years ago, I developed an effective method of lucid dream induction while investigating the 
feasibility of learning to have lucid dreams at will for my Ph.D. dissertation work. 

Before trying induction procedures, I remembered less than one lucid dream per month. While 
using autosuggestion during the first sixteen months of my study (the technique is presented 
below), I recalled an average of five lucid dreams per month with a range of one to thirteen. 
(The month in which I had thirteen lucid dreams using autosuggestion happened while I was 
doing my first laboratory studies of lucid dreaming, which incidentally illustrates the powerful 
effect of motivation on the frequency of lucid dreaming.) However, during the period I was using 
autosuggestion to induce lucid dreams, I had no understanding of how I was doing it! All I knew 
was that I was telling myself before bed: “Tonight, I will have a lucid dream.” But how? I had no 
idea. And having no idea meant that there was little I could do to make it happen. Without 
understanding the process involved, I stood little chance of learning to have lucid dreams at will. 

Nevertheless, I gradually observed a psychological factor that correlated with the occurrence of 
my lucid dreams: the presleep intention to remember to recognize I was dreaming. Once I knew 
how I was trying to induce lucid dreams, it became much easier to focus my efforts. This 
clarification of intention was followed by an immediate increase in the monthly frequency of my 
lucid dreams. Further practice and refinements led to a method whereby I could reliably induce 
lucid dreams. With this new method, I had as many as four lucid dreams in one night and as 
many as twenty- six in one month. I now could have a lucid dream on any night I chose and had 
accomplished my goal of showing that it is possible to bring access to the lucid dream state 
under volitional control. For people who were willing and able to learn my method, it was now 
possible to enter the world of lucid dreaming almost at will. 

Once I knew that I was trying to remember to do something (that is, become lucid) at a later time 
(that is, when next I’m dreaming), I was able to devise a technique to help me accomplish that. 
How can we manage to remember to do something in a dream? Perhaps we should start with a 
simpler question: How do we remember to do things in ordinary life? 

In everyday life we remember most things we have to do by using some sort of external 
mnemonic or memory aid (a grocery list, phone pad, string around the finger, memo by the door, 
etc.). But how do we remember future intentions (this is called prospective memory) without 
relying on external reminders? Motivation plays an important role. You are less likely to forget to 
do something that you really want to do. 

When you set yourself the goal to remember to do something, you have made the goal one of 
your current concerns and thereby have activated a goal-seeking brain system that will stay 
partially activated until you have achieved it. If the goal is very important to you, the system 
stays highly activated and you keep checking to see if it’s time to do it, until it is time. It never 
becomes fully unconscious. But the more typical case is when, for example, you decide to buy 

 
 
 
 
 
 
some tacks the next time you go to the store. This is hardly important enough to keep on the 
front page of your mind, so you go to the store and forget about your intention. That is, unless 
while at the store you just happen to notice a box of tacks, or even a hammer which brings up 
tacks by association. 

This reveals the other major factor involved in remembering to do things: association. When 
facing the challenge of remembering to do something, we can increase the likelihood of success 
by (1) being strongly motivated to remember and (2) forming mental associations between what 
we want to remember to do and the future circumstances in which we intend to do it. These 
associations are greatly strengthened by the mnemonic (memory aid) of visualizing yourself 
doing what you intend to remember. 

Thinking of lucid dream induction as a problem of prospective memory, I developed a technique 
designed to increase my chances of remembering my intention to be lucid: the Mnemonic 
Induction of Lucid Dreams procedure, (MILD).13 I have revised the procedure for this book in 
light of my experience, both using the technique myself to produce lucid dreams and teaching it 
to hundreds of others. Please take note of the prerequisites discussed below. 

MILD Prerequisites 

To successfully induce lucid dreams with MILD, you need to have certain capacities. First of all, 
if you can’t reliably remember to carry out future intentions while awake, there is little chance 
that you will remember to do anything while asleep. So before attempting MILD, you need to 
prove to yourself that you can indeed remember to do things while awake. If you are like most 
people, you are used to relying on external reminders and therefore need practice in 
remembering intentions using only your own mental power. The following is an exercise to help 
you acquire the necessary skill to perform the MILD technique. 

Exercise: Prospective Memory Training 

Read the day’s targets 
This exercise is designed to be practiced over an entire week. Below is a set of four target 
events for each day of the week. When you get up in the morning, read only the targets for that 
day. (Do not read the targets before the proper day.) Memorize the day’s targets. 

Look for your targets during the day 
Your goal is to notice the next occurrence of each event, at which time you will perform a state 
test: “Am I dreaming?” So, if your target is, “The next time I hear a dog bark, “when you hear this 
next, note it and do a state test. You are aiming to notice the target once – the next time it 
happens. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Keep track of how many target events you hit 
At the end of the day, write down how many of the four targets you succeeded in noticing (you 
can make a space in your dream journal to record your progress with this exercise). If you 
realize during the day that you missed your first chance to notice one of your targets, then you 
have failed to hit that target, even though you may notice its occurrence later in the day. If you 
are certain that one or more of the targets did not occur at all during the day, say so with a note 
in your dream journal. 

Continue the exercise for at least one week 
Practice the exercise until you have tried all of the daily targets given below. If at the end of the 
week, you are still missing most of the targets, continue until you can hit most of them. Make up 
your own list of targets, keep track of your success rate, and observe how your memory 
develops. 

Daily Targets  

Sunday 

The next time I see a pet or animal 
The next time I look at my face in a mirror The next time I turn on a light 
The next time I see a flower 
The next time I see a flower 

Monday 

The next time I write anything down The next time I feel pain 
The next time I hear someone say my name The next time I drink something 

Tuesday 

The next time I see a traffic light The next time I hear music 
The next time I throw something in the garbage The next time I hear laughter 

Wednesday 

The next time I turn on a television or radio The next time I see a vegetable 
The next time I see a red car The next time I handle money 

Thursday 

The next time I read something other than this list The next time I check the time 
The next time I notice myself daydreaming The next time I hear the telephone ringing 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Friday 

The next time I open a door The next time I see a bird 
The next time I use the toilet after noon The next time I see the stars 

Saturday 

The next time I put a key in a lock The next time I see an advertisement 
The next time I eat anything after breakfast The next time I see a bicycle 

MILD Technique 

1.  Set up dream recall 

Before going to bed resolve to wake up and recall dreams during each dream period throughout 
the night (or the first dream period after dawn, or after 6: 00 a. m. or whenever you find 
convenient). 

2.  Recall your dream 

When you awaken from a dream period, no matter what time it is, try to recall as many details 
as possible from your dream. If you find yourself so drowsy that you are drifting back to sleep, 
do something to arouse yourself. 

3.  Focus your intent 

While returning to sleep, concentrate single-mindedly on your intention to remember to 
recognize that you’re dreaming. Tell yourself: “Next time I’m dreaming, I want to remember I’m 
dreaming.” Really try to feel that you mean it. Narrow your thoughts to this idea alone. If you find 
yourself thinking about anything else, just let go of these thoughts and bring your mind back to 
your intention to remember. 

4.  See yourself becoming lucid 

At the same time, imagine that you are back in the dream from which you have just awakened, 
but this time you recognize that it is a dream. Find a dreamsign in the experience; when you see 
it say to yourself: “I’m dreaming!” and continue your fantasy. For example, you might decide that 
when you are lucid you want to fly. In that case, imagine yourself taking off and flying as soon as 
you come to the point in your fantasy that you “realize” you are dreaming. 

5.  Repeat 

Repeat Steps 3 and 4 until your intention is set, then let yourself fall asleep. If, while falling 
asleep, you find yourself thinking of anything else, repeat the procedure so that the last thing in 
your mind before falling asleep is your intention to remember to recognize the next time you are 
dreaming. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Commentary 

If all goes well, you’ll fall asleep and find yourself in a dream, at which point you’ll remember to 
notice that you are dreaming. 

If it takes you a long time to fall asleep while practicing this method, don’t worry: The longer 
you’re awake, the more likely you are to have a lucid dream when you eventually return to 
sleep. This is because the longer you are awake, the more times you will repeat the MILD 
procedure, reinforcing your intention to have a lucid dream. Furthermore, the wakefulness may 
activate your brain, making lucidity easier to attain. 

In fact, if you are a very deep sleeper, you should get up after memorizing your dream and 
engage in ten to fifteen minutes of any activity requiring full wakefulness. Turn on the light and 
read a book. Get out of bed and go into another room. One of the best things to do is to write 
out your dream and read it over, noting all dreamsigns, in preparation for the MILD visualization. 

Many people meet with success after only one or two nights of MILD; others take longer. 
Continued practice of MILD can lead to greater proficiency at lucid dreaming. Many of our 
advanced oneironauts have used it to cultivate the ability to have several lucid dreams any night 
they choose. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

What is a persistent realm? 
It's a term I use to describe certain kinds of dreams I have. 
Dreams that are persistent, meaning where your actions have consequences, dreams you 
can resume each night where you left off. 
So why do I call them "realms"? 
Well, for me these kinds of dreams are a bit more than just persistent. 
There are a few more unique characteristics to them: 

•  Persistence - When you "enter" a realm, you "resume" the dream where you left of 

last time. (more or less) 

•  Consequences - Because of the persistence, every action you take has 

consequences. If you change something it will remain changed forever. For 
example, people will remember you and the conversations you've had with them. 

•  Laws & Dream Powers - A realm has a set of laws of physics (fitting the setting of 
the realm), which may be different from waking life. There may be ways to cast 
magic for example. You can learn, understand, use (and abuse) these laws, but you 
can never do anything that violates them. (Such as using dream powers) If a 
character does something ridiculous then it means that there is a law enabling him 
to do so, and you most likely can learn to do the same thing. 

•  Realism - Those dreams feel pretty damn real. I assume the main reason behind 
this (besides the technique I use) is that all dream characters are intelligent. You 
won't encounter the typical "derpy" DC who seems completely lost. DC's are 
intelligent and follow their own agenda. Their actions can be completely 
unexpected. 

How does one create a persistent realm? 
It took me some time to come up with an idea for that one. 
As I mentioned earlier it's not really a technique. 
It's more of a state of mind kind of thing... it's difficult to come up with an explanation. 
I guess the best way I can explain it is by fully elaborating on my train of thoughts. 
That unfortunately means a LOT of text, but I really don't see a better way of doing this. 

I am fully aware that fully persistent dreams are possible because I have experienced them 
for many years. 
The realm containing Teraluna is definitely persistent and my basis for any ideas I've come 
up with. 
The issue is that I've never knowingly created it. I've been dreaming about it ever since I was 
a young child. 

But then I realized that this isn't the point. 

 
 
 
 
The point is that it still works. 
I can still go there. The persistency is never broken. I still can't use dream powers. 
Why is that? Why does this never fail? 
I believe the reason behind this is very simple... 

Say for example you want to summon an item in a lucid dream. You need a key to unlock a 
door. 
What do you do? You use some kind of summoning technique: 

I'll just search my pockets. I might have it on me? Why else would I come to a locked door if 
I wouldn't have the key? 

This is a trick of course. One that works rather well. 
Just searching your pockets is a common and easy summoning technique in lucid dreams. 
Guiding your thoughts towards believing that the chances are high that you have that item 
on you will futher increase the summoning chances. 
So guiding your thoughts is an interesting technique to keep in mind. 
But something more important first: 

When you succeed and find the key, something very obvious happens. 
Something easily overlooked. 
Once you find that key and you hold it in your hand... it won't disappear. 
I mean, why would it? It doesn't make any sense for an item to just vanish. 
So what's the reason behind that? 

The key won't disappear because I know that it won't disappear. 

Is it really that simple? 

The realm of Teraluna is persistent, because I know it to be persistent. 

Is that all there is to it? Is the answer that simple? 
But there's another thought anchored somewhere deep within my mind 

I know that creating a persistent realm must be extremely difficult. 

Such a train of thoughts is toxic to lucid dreams. 
It's there because of many reasons. 

• 

I've never managed to create a persistent realm at will, so it must be hard. 

•  Creating entire realms feels like an overwhelmingly big task. 

•  You don't often hear people claiming to have done this so it must be hard. 

The list goes on. 
While some of these deeply anchored thoughts benefit you, others, like the ones I just 

 
 
 
 
listed, disable you. 
In my opinion they are absolutely crucial to lucid dreams. 

At this point it is clear to me what the technique to create such a persistent realm must 
encompass: 
1) Bypass the I know that creating a persistent realm must be extremely difficult. thought, 
create a new realm and access it. 
2) Make yourself "know" that his is a persistent realm. You can go back whenever you want. 

But you cannot just selectively remove ideas that are so deeply anchored within your 
mind and insert new ones. 
That just doesn't work. You can't just decide to "know" something. 
You can think about it, educate yourself on it, discuss it, 
and eventually it might change. But you cannot consciously edit something you "know". 
If you think about it, it happens all the time though. Your ideas, beliefs and even knowledge 
changes, in the blink of an eye. 
It just happens. 
And I argue that this process happens sub-consciously. 
I also argue that you are able to interact with your sub-conscious in different ways when 
you are dreaming, 
albeit in no way that I think anyone fully understands. 

Think about the example with summoning a key I used earlier. 
I guided my thoughts towards believing that I already had the key on me. 
I never directly thought that the key must be in my pocket. 
I merely started a train of thoughts and let my sub-conscious finish it for me. 
This is something extremely powerful in dreams, if you can do it. 
This doesn't always work of course, but it is such a versatile and powerful tool, albeit 
difficult to control. 

Expectations, hope, fear, they all play a very important role during dreams. 
When you first learn to fly, you do so by trying to do it over and over again, thus increasing 
your expectations that it will work with every small success you have. 
But creating entire realms is not really a process that can be learned like that, it simply 
takes too long. 
A more instantanious method is required, like the one used in summoning the key. 

Understanding this, I was able to come up with a technique that works for me. 
Creating, or rather going to a new realm is pretty straightforward, all I need to use is a 
teleportation technique. 
Making myself believe or "know" that this is a persistent realm is the tricky part. 
I need to guide my thoughts towards believing this, without actually thinking that I am 
guiding my thoughts towards this goal, and without finishing it consciously. 

 
 
 
 
 
I hope this makes sense... 
Anyways, here are some DJ snippets from an entry where I tried to do this very thing, 
with my current thoughts on it. 

Creating a fully persistent realm 
I get out of bed and rather quickly become aware that I am dreaming. 
Going through my usual routine of rubbing my hands and remembering my current dream 
goals, 
I eventually remember that I wanted to try the whole persistent realm thing again. 
Last time ended in a disaster, but after my recent reflections on the topic I'm somewhat 
confident 
that I'll manage to do it again. And maybe this time I won't die like an idiot half an hour in. 
This is a difficult task, so I further increase my lucidity until I feel it has reached a sufficient 
level. 

I do this using a technique I use both for stabilization and increased lucidity. 
I have found that for me, the stability of my dreams and my level of lucidity is strongly (but 
not exclusively) related 
to how clearly and reasonably I'm thinking. 
By forcing myself to solve rather complex problems, using mostly logic, and verifying that I 
have solved them correctly, 
I manage to assure that I am indeed thinking clearly. 
Knowing this I am very confident that my dream will remain stable, and that I will maintain a 
high level of lucidity. 
This is somewhat crucial for this task, because it all revolves around a rather complex and 
entirely mental technique. 

I breathe in deeply and exhale, whilst stretching to prepare myself for the task at hand. 
I am amused by the realization that stretching a dream body makes little sense, but quickly 
focus on the task at hand again. 
I try to relax myself as much as I can. 
I imagine myself standing inside of a bubble containing the current dream. 
A bubble created solely by my sub-conscious. 
I need to push myself out of it in order to go to real worlds. 

This is important. 
If you want to experience an entire world or setting (Hogwarts, Middle-Earth...), never 
try to create it right in front of you. 
There will be inconsistencies, DCs will go out of character, forget what they're supposed to 
do... 
In my experience, it just doesn't work right. 
Instead try to go there. 

 
 
 
 
 
Don't create Hogwarts, instead go to the real Hogwarts. 

I do this by leaving my dream bubble (just a bubble containing my current dream), and 
going to an entirely new place. 
Doing so I have an easier time believing that I am in a real place, and not in a dream 
controlled by my own sub-conscious, 
which renders dreams much more realistic. 

I drift away from my dream body, quickly reaching the limits of my small dream bubble, 
which only encompassed my house. 
As I gain distance, I find myself in a place that resembles a galaxy. My dream bubble is a 
very faint star, quickly becoming invisible within 
the sea of bigger and much more vibrant stars. 
It is cold and dark out here. 
I understand that these stars are other realms, which I can probably visit. 
This time I won't just pick one at random though. 
I would love to have a persistent realm in a sci-fi universe. 
I float from star to star waiting for something to indicate such a sci-fi universe I suppose. 
Whilst I don't receive such a sign, one star catches my attention for no apparent reason. 
I nearly dismiss the thought before realizing that I might as well go with this one, as nothing 
special is happening. 

Intuition is another powerful tool in lucid dreams. 
When you are lost, or if you need to take a decision without knowing which one is beneficial 
to you, go with your intuition. 
It manifests itself in different ways, but most often as no more than a faint feeling, which 
you'll usually dismiss 
unless you consciously look out for them. 
Obviously, your intuition isn't always right, and it is difficult to tell it apart from your own 
imagination in dreams. 
But when you have nothing to go on, intuition is always better than nothing. 

I approach the star, which is considerably increasing in size as I get closer, pondering on 
how I entered a new realm last time. 
But I have no time to finish that thought. I am drawn into the realm by a superior force and 
loose vision for no more than a split second. 
A new scene pops up instantaneously, as if someone had punched me in the face. 
There is no blurriness, no transition period as is common with scene changes in dreams, 
nothing like that at all. 
The new scene is just there. 

First steps in a new world 
I am quite disorientated. It is very loud. There's people talking all around me. 

 
 
 
 
 
Apparently I'm queuing for something. I try to look around to get an idea as to where I am, 
but this proves 
rather difficult as there's people all around me, most of them a little taller than I am. 
I need to get out of the crowd. 
Fortunately, it looks like I was next in line for whatever people are queuing for anyways. 
I pass a man and faintly hear him say "Passport please!", but it barely registers. 

Whilst I did hear him say that, the thought never registered. 
I immediately forgot about it, and was only reminded of it a few seconds later: 

I need to see if this place is real or if I ended up my own dream bubble. 
Someone grabs onto my shoulder and stops me rather unexpectedly... 
I just keep moving because whomever that is is of no importance to the dream. 

When I know that a DC isn't important, and I decide not to interact with them, they will 
always disappear. 
This is somewhat crucial, because without this the following wouldn't have surprised me 
as much as it did. 

"HEY!" 

I can't seem to shake myself loose and turn around rather annoyed. 

"What?" 

The man who stopped me is wearing some kind of uniform and is looking at me rather 
angrily. 
He's resting his right hand on what appears to be a holstered firearm. 

"I said PASSPORT PLEASE." 

Huh? What? 
He's slowly moving his gun out of his holster. 
Finally it strikes me. 
This is not my dream. 
This is real. 
I'm in trouble. 

There were a lot of thoughts shooting through my mind at that moment. 
No dream character would ever behave like that. I never investigated that thought any 
further, because it all seemed so obvious. 
I realized at that moment that I had succeeded. The realm was real. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fortunately, due to the trouble I was in, I never followed up on that thought, so I never 
questioned the conclusion I came to. 

"Wow, I'm so sorry, I was completely lost in thoughts there." 

That should buy me a few seconds. He rolls his eyes and pushes his gun back into the 
holster. 
He holds out some kind of tablet device to me, clearly expecting me to do something with 
my passport. 
Fortunately, a quick glance to my side reveals a person in another queue wiping something 
credit card sized over a similar device, and attaching it to her belt. 
I quickly search my belt, hoping that I have a similar card and I get lucky. 
I mimic the motion of the other person, which is followed by a rather friendly beep from the 
device I swiped the card over. 
That sounded like it worked. 

"Haha, sorry about that." 

He couldn't care less. He has already turned his back towards me. 

At this point I was completely absorbed by the dream. 
The thought that this might just be a normal dream never occured to me. 
I knew that this place was real, which in return means that it is persistent and that I will be 
able to go back to it. 
It worked, and it did so rather quickly, without taking much of an action at all. 
I didn't actively guide my thoughts much, besides the teleportation technique I used. 
But I didn't have to, because my state of mind about persistent realms carried over into 
my dream. 
My sub-conscious solved the problem for me. 
It came up with a scenario that would trick itself into thinking that I was a visitor in another 
realm. 

Orientation 
If in your lucid adventures, you ever find yourself in a situation where you have no idea 
where you are and what you are doing there, check your pockets! 
It might sound obvious, but in dreams you often don't think about doing the obvious. 
Realize that it makes no sense for you to be anywhere with empty pockets. 
At the very least you should have your wallet on you, but more importantly, you might have 
something on you indicating what you are here for. 

I get away from the crowd and find myself in a very large hallway. 
There's windows on both sides, revealing that I am in orbit around a planet. 
Holy shit I'm in space! 

 
 
 
 
 
Spaaaace station~ 

But I'm completely lost. I have no idea where I am or even who I am. 
Alright... one step at a time. 
I start moving towards the end of the hallway, but draw my focus towards the contents of 
my pockets. 
I empty them both, whilst still walking, and investigate their contents. 

I have on me: 

•  The passport thing 

•  Some kind of crystal, consisting of rectengular shapes. It might be a key. 

•  A small package with another credit card looking thing attached to it. 

A key? Oooooooh. 
I might have a spaceship! 
How awesome would that be? Yeah. I definitely have a spaceship. 
I put everything back into my pockets and check where I currently am. 

I find myself in front of hangar 4, which is of course a spaceship hangar. 

See what I did there? 
I solved 2 problems at the same time. I didn't just investigate the contents of my pockets. 
Before doing so, I started walking into a direction that took me away from where I previously 
was. 
Putting my focus on something else put my body into auto-pilot. 
You know, like when you're gaming with your friends late at night, and you quickly go 
downstairs to grab something to drink, but your thoughts are entirely focused on the game? 
Sometimes you find yourself back in front of your pc with a cold beverage, without really 
remembering the process of getting it. (Or maybe my gaming addiction is just out of control 

) 

You can abuse this in dreams if you want to go somewhere, but you don't know how to 
get there, or if you simply have no idea where to go. 
It can be tricky at first, because you can't stop thinking about it, but you'll quickly get a hang 
of it. 
In this case I got the idea of the key being for my spaceship mid-way. (Spaceships use 
ignition keys, just like cars right? *cough*) 
My body automatically walked me towards where this spaceship is, even though I did not 
know where it was. 
Somewhere deep within my thoughts I knew that I had gotten to this space station 
somehow. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
If the key indicates that I own a spaceship, then I would have arrived in this spaceship, and I 
would also remember where I parked it. 
Putting myself in "autopilot" I can walk to locations that make sense for me to know 
within the dream plot, even if I don't consciously know where they are. 

There's quite a few small spaceships in here. 
All sorts of contraptions, reaching from luxury boats to things that are close to falling apart. 
Is one of them mine? Which one is mine? 
I go deeper into the hangar to get a better view of all the ships and then I spot her. 

Yeah... there's no doubt whatsoever. That must be mine. 
She's reasonably sized, bigger than a jet fighter, but smaller than say the space shuttle 
orbiter. 
And she has... uh... let's say she has seen some better times? 
It seems like there used to be a layer of paint on it, but that's nearly peeled off entirely. 
There are many dents on the outer hull, surrounded by dark dust. 
Probably projectile impacts, judging by the consistent size and patterns. 
There's quite an abundant amount of scratches on it as well. 
And... is that a heat shield? 
Oh god... 
The heat shield is mostly pitch black, but you can clearly see in some spots that it is 
supposed to be a red / golden color. 
Might have had a few atmospheric re-entries at optimistic speeds... 
There are a few hull plates of inconsistent size that are clearly newer than the rest of the 
hull. 
A few patched up holes...? 

What a piece of shit... 
I absolutely love it! 
I wouldn't have it any other way. This is so me. This feels right. 
And compared to the other ships in this hangar it clearly has the largest engine to ship ratio! 
I get a bit of a Han Solo esque vibe. 

As I approach it a large chunk of the hull plating slides itself forward, revealing an airlock. 
A ramp extends just in time so I can get to it easily. 
The airlock opens automatically as I get close enough and closes behind me as I go 
through... 

Your sub-conscious has the unique ability of shaping your dreams in such a way that you 
can experience something beyond your expectations and your imagination. 
However, things will not always go according to plan, and may even seem unpleasant at 
first. 
But given enough lucid dreams you'll find out that you can find enjoyment, even in things 

 
 
 
 
 
that do not seem pleasant at first. 
The best example I have for this is pain. 
Obviously you wouldn't want to experience pain in your dreams right? 
I thought so for a long time, but I realized I was wrong after a rather epic fight, where I could 
feel every single cut and bruise on my body. 
It made the fight feel so much more real and important, it increased the experience as a 
whole. 
If you've ever played a pen&paper rpg, you probably know that it can be more interesting to 
play more of a "normal" character. 
You don't always need to be the hero with the best equipment, who is destined to save the 
world. 
In dreams there's joy to be found everywhere. It will find you, all you have to do is accept it. 

Survival 
I wasn't sure at first whether or not I should mention this, due to the toxic thoughts I wrote 
of earlier. 
But yeah, the whole persistent realm thing comes at a price: it is persistent. 
Well duh, of course it is. 
But in my case this means that my life is persistent as well. 
If I die in a persistent realm I can never go back to that realm. 
I've lost 2 of them due to death, and I tried getting back to one of them for quite a long time, 
but eventually I gave up. 
I guess it is better this way. It makes the other realms feel more valuable and my decisions 
more important. 
Regardless, I suggest that you value your life, should have similar persistent dreams. 
However, in order to progress in your dreams you will occasionally need to make a leap 
of faith. 
Make sure that you take them sparsely, and that intuition is on your side. 

Going back 
This is rather straightforward. I just teleport with the intention of going back to the realm. 
I do this as soon as I can after creating the realm (next stable lucid), so my thoughts about 
it are still fresh. 
I try to visit it as often as I can during the following days, so that everything settles in. 
Once I've gone there a few times my confidence is so high that I can't really imagine loosing 
the ability to resume the realm whenever 
I desire to do so. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In case you want to try to do something similar to my persistent realms technique, here's a 
few suggestions: 

•  You'll need a teleportation technique. As I mentioned earlier, creating is bad, going 

to is good. There's no need to copy my teleportation technique though. Any 
technique should work fine, use what you feel most comfortable with. 

•  Don't actively try to find something that indicates that the realm "must be real". You 
cannot force the issue. The realization has to strike you unexpectedly. Having the 
correct state of mind in waking life, and simply intending to go to such a realm 
should be all you need to do. 
If the epiphany doesn't happen, just try again. 

• 

If something is completely off (DC's are retarded, something clearly violates the law 
of your realm...) just consider this attempt a failure, and try again next time. Never 
attempt to fix it using dream powers. 

•  You need good dream recall with a good lucid rate so you can go back multiple times 

over the course over the next few days. 
You also need a high level of lucidity, so that you can quickly process complex 
thoughts properly. 

Anyways, that's more than enough text for a single entry. 
If you have any thoughts or questions about persistent realms and/or other techniques I 
use, by all means, post ahead. 

 
 
 

REALITY CHECKS 

A reality check is a common tool used by dreamers practicing all techniques, but mostly 
DILD. They are practiced during the day, either spontaneously, or with help of some 
reminder. 

Why do I need to do a reality check? 

1. Repetitive action of checking reality will start happening in regular dreams. 
2. Heightened awareness during practice helps gain awareness in regular dream. 
3. Once having awareness, it confirms lucidity. 

How to do a reality check? 

RC starts with an awareness question, something like "Wow, am I dreaming?" (When I ask 
this, I personally do believe that I'm dreaming. But even if you don't, do not ever think to 
yourself "Of course I'm definitely awake". If you believe that you are awake, then you will 
have same thoughts in your dream and you will not get lucid.) 

Examine the nature of your current world. Analyze if you feel strange and if the visual field 
looks normal. Check your cognitive function. Ask yourself "Do I remember things from 
earlier in this day?" "Do I actually know what day this is and if I should really be here?" "How 
did I get here, what was I doing 2 hrs ago?" 

Examine your surroundings and try to compare what you see with how you remember it 
should look like. 

Do a Reality check and fully expect it to work. Then you say your mantra. I use "Next time 
I'm dreaming, I realize I'm dreaming". 

Since it's not really the RC that will get you lucid, but the awareness question and 
questioning of your reality, it's very important that you believe you are dreaming and that 
your RC will work. 

Important: Even if you come to the conclusion that you are not dreaming, don't 
acknowledge it. Don't say/think "I'm not dreaming". Instead, say a mantra "Next time I'm 
dreaming, I realize I'm dreaming", or "Next time I RC, I realize I'm dreaming." Otherwise, you 
may RC in your dream and out of habit you will acknowledge that you are not dreaming. 

How often should I do a reality check? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
You can RC every time you remember to do so. Or if you hear/see a reminder that you set. 
It can be a few times an hour to few times a day. In general, the more you do it, the better—
as long as you don't do them mindlessly or as a routine chore, without paying attention to 
the real point of doing RCs which is questioning your reality and expecting to be in a dream. 

Different Reality Checks 

It's always best to practice at least 2-3 RCs at the same time. 
Some of the best RCs based on ease of practice in a dream and success rate: 

1. Looking at hands + Counting fingers Or without counting fingers - Very reliable 
2. Nose plug - Very reliable 
3. Thumb/palm - Very reliable 
4. Gravity - Very reliable 
5. Try to change something - Very reliable  
6. Switches - Less reliable 
7. Reading - Less reliable 
8. Make your own 

1. In Waking Life (IWL) Look at your hands, palms up and notice details. Count your 
fingers. Do they look normal (color, shape, size, can you make your finger longer?) Do you 
have the right amount? Don't expect to count 10 fingers. Don't expect them to be normal. 
This is a good RC because your hands are always there, IWL and in a dream, and you can 
practice this discreetly. 

2. IWL - pinch your nose shut with your hand and try to breathe. Fully expect to be able to 
breathe. If you can breathe, you are in a dream. Also a good RC because your nose is 
always there, little less discreet to practice. 

3. IWL - Try to gently push your thumb through a palm of your other hand. Pay attention to 
the sensation. Anticipate that it will go through. In the dream, do the same. If it goes 
through, you are dreaming. Good RC also because you don't have to go and look for them 
and quite discreet to practice. 

4. IWL - Say, "If this was a dream, I could levitate" and expect to float up. Gently push off 
and expect to start rising up. Do the same in a dream. Good RC, you can do it anywhere and 
totally discreet. 

5. IWL - look at something and try to change it. Say "if this was a dream, that [something] 
would be [something else]. You can think of an item being some other item, or try to change 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
color, size, movement... It's fun and it transfers into your dream very well. Don't forget to 
use emotions when doing it - be sure you are in a dream, so the thing will change. If you 
have a dream goal, like summoning something, you can try to do that, as if you were in a 
dream. 

6. Try to turn on a light switch. In a dream, flipping a switch may/may not work. But people 
do report that they can turn on lights in a dream. And if there is no light switch near in a 
dream, you would have to look for one and waste your time. 

7. Try to read. In a dream, you can read, but when you take a second look, it will say 
something different, or gibberish. Also time on a clock may have letters instead of 
numbers. But it can also look correct. And you have to find a clock in a dream before you 
can do RC. 

8. Make your own. You can make pretty much anything into RC. Just make sure you 
preceed it with an awareness question and you genuinely believe you are dreaming. For 
example if you wear glasses, articles of clothing, how far can you throw something, try to 
summon something or make it walk through the door. If you have something that you only 
see in your dream, like a dream watch (BrandonBoss's RC), you can keep checking if you 
have that. The possibilities are endless. 

If you have problems finding some item in a dream that you practiced RCs on in Waking 
Life, switch to something that doesn't require any external object. For example, if you RC on 
your bracelet, and you don't see it in your dream, that may stop you from RCing and losing 
your chance at becoming lucid. This is another reason why practicing 2-3 RCs is 
recommended. You may pick them from different categories. For example, 1 RC - [item], 
2nd RC - your hands, 3rd RC - gravity. 

Tools to remind yourself to RC 

You don't have to limit yourself when and how and why you do RC. It is best to use all 
possible reasons to better your chance that some of them will work. 

1. Use an activity reminder - something you do often. RC every time you: 
- walk through doors 
- use the restroom 
- notice a specific color 
- get a phone call 
- get a drink 
- and anything else you can think of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Use a physical reminder - audio or visual 
- set your watch to beep every hour 
- set your timer 
- put some sticky notes all over your place, school books, laptop, door frame, wall above 
you bed, first thing you see in the morning 
- put a rubber band or bracelet on your wrist 
- and whatever else you can 

All these are just to help you get into habit of RCing. Pretty soon you will find that you will 
start RCing even without them. And that's the best way to do it. Spontaneously. Whenever 
the feeling "OMG, what if this is a dream" strikes you. 

3. Dream signs - anything that occurs often in your dreams AND in your waking life. 
You RC on these in WL every time you see it, think about it or say it out loud. Then, when 
they show up in your dream, you are likely to RC there as well. 

Side note: Sometimes you get a dream sign that is not so common in your waking life. For 
example, a school you used to go to years ago, friends that moved away, deceased family 
members, or even things from movies, like dragons, actors, or anything similar. 

Obviously, if you don't see these in waking life, you can't RC on them. But, not all is lost. 
You can RC on photographs, even on pictures you draw or find on the internet. Also, every 
time when you think of the person/item/place, you can say it out loud and imagine how it 
looks.  

4. When you notice something strange. It can be strange for real or you just pretend it is. 
Let's face it, our lives are not that strange, so we have to make up some stuff.  
- a classmate shows up when you know he is at home sick 
- you thought you still had some beer in your fridge but it's all gone 
- it's lunch time, you should be hungry, but you are not 
- boy/girl that has been ignoring you is suddenly talking to you 
- you see or hear anything and you think to yourself "that's strange" 

5. At random 
-every time you get the sinking/exciting/freaky/exhilarating feeling in your stomach, that 
what if this was a dream and you didn't notice 

Did your RC fail? 

This is one of the most common questions about RCs. Why did my RC fail? 

For example, you are in a dream, you get the urge to RC, or you decide to RC because you 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
get suspicious that you could be in a dream. You RC and it doesn't work. Your thumb won't 
go through your palm, you can't breathe with pinched nose... 

This can happen if during your waking life practice, you don't believe that your RC will do 
what it's suppose to do. If you think "I know I'm awake, so I know my thumb will not go 
through my palm". This thought will also happen in your dream. And since our dreams are 
ruled by our thoughts, what you say/think/believe, will happen. 

And since we know that it's not really the RC that gets us lucid (although sometimes it may 
seem so), it is absolutely critical that we believe that we are in a dream, and that our RC will 
do what it's supposed to when we are practicing during day. If you are not able to believe 
that you are asleep, then at least be opened to idea, that you are dreaming. Have some 
doubts, don't be sure that you are awake.  

Then, this thought "I'm dreaming and my RC works" will manifest itself in our dreams and it 
will get us lucid. 

The truth behind "I never RC in my dream and yet I get lucid. So RCs are not needed." 

You may notice that sometimes you get lucid and you didn't even do an RC. It may seem 
like you just got lucid out of the blue and RCs are not working, because you didn't even use 
it and got lucid. Important part of RC is the awareness question, when you ask yourself if 
you are in a dream and you truly believe that you are. So this belief may happen in your non-
lucid dream, and you will suddently believe that you are in a dream. You may or may not 
follow that up with RC. But this realization didn't come from nothing. It came from your 
hard work of practicing awareness and RCs. 

Conclusion 

After practicing Reality Checks together with awareness and mantras, pretty soon these 
actions, and most importantly, feelings, will start to happen in your non-lucid dreams 
naturally. Awareness question and associated feeling will give you some awareness and 
possibly even make you lucid, and RC will either help you realize that you are lucid, or it will 
help you confirm it. Happy dreams. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Senses Initiated Lucid Dream (SSILD) Official Tutorial  

Background 

SSILD is a modern lucid dreaming technique. It is easy to learn, highly effective, and 
produces consistent results over period. I developed this technique in 2011 in order to 
teach lucid dreaming to fellow dreamers on a Chinese forum. The first written version of the 
technique was published under the title "太玄功", which literally translates to "A Very 
Mysterious Technique". This is rather fitting because at the time no one had the faintest 
idea why it worked. Despite this lack of theory, the feedback on the technique was 
overwhelmingly positive. Within just a few months we gathered many hundreds of success 
stories! 

Building on this initial success, we continued to refine the technique, and it essentially 
became a collaborated effort among hundreds of people. The tutorial went through a few 
revisions, and with each version we saw improvements in ease of use and effectiveness. A 
year later I wrote the first English version of the tutorial and published it on a few lucid 
dream online forums. This time I chose the name "Senses Initiated Lucid Dream", partly to 
conform to the unofficial but widely accepted naming convention of LD techniques, and 
partly due to increased knowledge and understanding gained during the past year. 

While people on these forums appear more slow to embrace a brand new technique, the 
result was nonetheless quite promising. Between DreamViews and LD4All, there are more 
than a hundred success stories recorded in 9 months, within only two threads. 

Today, SSILD has become one of the most popular LD induction techniques on the Chinese 
forum, which has grown to host more than 80,000 members. The numbers of success 
stories are too numerous to count. Another exciting aspect is SSILD's long-term 
sustainability. Whereas many techniques appear to become less effective over period as 
the users' initial enthusiasm wane, SSILD delivers consistent performance, turning novices 
to experts, and experts to masters. For example, more than a dozen members on my tiny 
personal forum are able to induce LDs on a daily basis. One of them even logged nearly 500 
LDs/OBEs in full detail within less than a year, a remarkable achievement by all means. 

Design Philosophy 

SSILD is designed from the ground up to be simple, "idiot-proof" even. It does not utilize 
advanced techniques such as relaxation and visualization, and stays away from delicate, 
non-measurable mental exercises. It despises the notion that lucid dreaming is more "art" 
than "technique". It does not require you to be gifted or creative, in fact, there is little room 
for improvisation. Just follow the simple steps outlined here and you should be all set. 
SSILD is made so concise that if you mix in other stuff you may actually end up creating 
negative impact on its performance. 

The "Cycle" 

The core component of SSILD is called a "Cycle". Each cycle consists three steps: 

Focus on Sight: Close your eyes and pay attention to the darkness behind your closed 
eyelids. Don't strain your eye muscles though. Your eyeballs should be resting, totally 
relaxed. If you don't see anything that's only normal. Do not attempt to spot visuals by 
moving your eyes around. 

Focus on Hearing: Further relax your eyes and shift your attention to your ears. If the room 
is quiet enough you might be able to hear some noise inside your head or the sound of your 
heartbeat. However, if you can't hear anything it is okay to listen to external sounds too. 

Focus on Somesthetic Senses (Touch): Direct your attention to your body. Feel it and see if 
you spot any unusual sensations such as tingling, heaviness, lightness, spinning 
sensations, and so on. If nothing like these can be felt, you can also try to feel the weight of 
the blanket, your heartbeat, temperature of the air, etc. 

The repeated stimulation on the senses enables SSILD to condition our mind and body into 
a subtle state that is optimized for lucid dream to occur naturally. We should keep this in 
mind so we don't make the common mistake of "trying too hard" during the cycles. 
Beginners usually want to see things, hear things, and feel things. When nothing unusual 
happens they become discouraged or even desperate. Avoid this mistake at all cost! One 
should not expect to experience anything phenomenal during the Cycle. In fact, it is better 
to expect NOTHING at all will happen. 

The Steps 

1. Go to bed early, preferably before 11pm. Set your alarm to wake up after 4 or 5 hours. 

2. Get out of bed and stay awake for 5-10 minutes. I suggest you visit the bathroom, rinse 
your mouth, and walk around or stretch a little bit. Try not to become too awake though. 

3. Return to bed and lie down in a comfortable position, preferably different from the one 
you usually use. This is to prevent you from falling into sleep prematurely. However, if you 
are the type of person who requires extra effort to fall asleep, you may want to use the 
usual position instead. 

4. Perform the "Cycle" quickly, repeat 4-6 times. This serves as a warm-up exercise so each 
step should be very short, a few seconds should be sufficient. 

5. Perform the "Cycle" slowly, repeat 3-4 times. This step is the most important one. You 
should take extra time during each step. Thanks to step 4, at this point you should have 
become sufficiently relaxed and you will find focusing on the senses become much easier. 
For example, your eyes will feel more relaxed, and you may get visuals such as lights, 
colors, or movements. You might also notice that the external sounds seem to be fading 
into the background. Do not get excited though. You should observe quietly and after a 
while move on to other senses. As far as timing goes we are flexible, but in general each 
step should take no fewer than 30 seconds. 

During the slow cycles, you may become distracted by a lot of random thoughts. This is a 
good indication that you are close to falling asleep. Do not try to suppress these thoughts -- 

they are your friends. Imagine they are gentle waves and let them carry you and wash you 
away from the shore of reality. You will occasionally become alert and realize you have lost 
track of your exercise. No worry, just start from the beginning of a cycle and you should be 
fine. 

6. Return to the most comfortable position and allow yourself fall into sleep as quickly as 
possible. Do not think too much and do not worry if it will work. The quicker you can fall 
asleep the more likely it will work. Have faith! 

What happens next 

One key characteristic of SSILD is that it is neither a WILD nor DILD technique. It is a hybrid. 
As such, it is important to become familiar with all the possible scenarios so you will 
maximize your chances. 

1. Hypnagogia: when we enter a dream consciously, we often encounter various unusual 
hypnagogic sensations. These include the sensation of falling, floating, seeing lights and 
images, hearing sharp noises, and many more. In fact, sometimes you may encounter 
sensations so strange that they are beyond words. When we encounter these sensations, 
chances are we are already in a dream, or getting really close. SSILD is known to cause 
hypnagogia during the Cycles (although this effect should NOT be sought after). It's also 
not uncommon for you to wake up suddenly while being bombarded by intense hypnagogic 
sensations. When this happens you should not become excited. Be a passive observer and 
wait for the sensations to amplify. You could also nudge them a little bit mentally, but do 
not overdo it. As soon as the sensations become clearly identifiable you should be able to 
perform a successful reality check and get up. Typically the dream will start from your 
bedroom because subconsciously that's where you expect you will be. You can also stay in 
bed longer and use visualization to create a dream scene manually. In any event, it is 
important for you to stay calm when encountering hypnagogia. Do not speak to yourselves 
or analyze it mentally as doing so can cause the sensations to fade and eventually wake 
you up. 

2. False Awakening: SSILD is known to cause a lot of FAs. Not any FA, but some super-
realistic ones! A typical scenario goes like this -- you finished doing SSILD and fell asleep. 
Then suddenly you wake up. No lucid dreams, perhaps not even a normal dream! Feeling 
disappointed you get out of the bed... then you wake up again! It was all but a dream! 
SSILD's ability to frequently create this type of FAs have been well-documented by now. 
Therefore, you should definitely develop the habit of performing a reality check upon each 
awakening after doing SSILD, no matter how convinced you are about your not being in a 
dream. Another possible scenario is that you slip into sleep during a SSILD cycle, and an FA 
immediately takes over. When this happens you may suddenly feel awake and it seems you 
are about to suffer insomnia. Some users complained that SSILD was causing them to lose 
sleep, only later found out they had been doing SSILD cycles in their dreams! Once you 
learn to catch these FAs your chance of success will be greatly improved. 

3. DILD: When you fall asleep from SSILD, you enter your dreams with heightened 
awareness. As a result, lucid dreams occur. This is called Dream Initiated Lucid Dream 
(DILD). With heightened awareness, you may be able to spot oddities in dreams and in turn 
become lucid. It is also very common for spontaneous lucid dreams to occur -- you 
suddenly become lucid for no apparent reason. 

4. Real Awakening: You wake up again after doing SSILD. You do a reality check and this 
time it is real. Do not despair. You still have chances. Try to stay still, and immediately relax 
your head, allowing the back of it to sink into the pillow. Then you need to perform a few 
extra medium-paced SSILD cycles. At this stage it is quite possible for you to encounter 
strong hypnagogia sensations. If not, just finish the cycles and go to sleep. You will have a 
much higher chance to succeed this time. 

FAQ 

Q: Can I do SSILD when I go to sleep? 

A: Yes you can, but it won't work. When you go to bed you typically start with a lot of NREM 
sleeps which are not ideal for lucid dream to occur. The level of acetylcholine (an important 
neurotransmitter which is a major driving force for lucid dreams) is also at lower level. 
Trying to lucid dream with any technique at this stage is a waste of time, even though this is 
the favorite mistake virtually every beginners make. 

Q: I'm used to go to bed late or have to get up early, can I still use SSILD? 

A: I suggest you do SSILD only when you have sufficient time. Even though it does not take 
up a lot of time to perform, you WILL be losing some sleeps. As such, for people who never 
get enough sleep, your best bet is to do SSILD at leisure. 

Q: Can I combine other breathing, meditation, relaxation techniques during or prior to 
doing SSILD? 

A: No. As mentioned earlier, SSILD is all about "conditioning". You condition your mind and 
body to the most optimal state for lucid dream to occur. This state, however, is very 
delicate. Mixing in other techniques will likely interfere with this state and cause negative 
impact on SSLID's performance. You're free to create your own routines once you master 
the technique, but for beginners I expect you to adhere to the instructions in this manual. 

Q: I get this itch... how am I supposed to stay still? 

A: You are not supposed to stay still! If you have an itch just scratch it. If you want to roll you 
roll. With SSILD you need to stay as comfortable as possible! Just do an extra cycle to 
compensate and you will be fine. This is in fact a major advantage over virtually all other 
methods. 

Q: My eyes strain/hurt when focusing on visions... 

A: Remember, you should NOT expect to see anything, so relax already! Do not strain your 
eye muscles. Your eyeballs should be resting, if not staying still. Performing a few quick 
cycles will also help you relax. 

Q: I can't feel anything when doing the cycles... 

A: We cannot stress this more -- it is OKAY to not feel anything, and it is WRONG if you 
actively pursue it and expect things to happen during the cycles. With the cycles you are 
setting a timer for the bomb to go off. You don't expect a bomb to go off WHILE you are 
setting the timer do you? Sure, it does go off occasionally... 

Q: I got insomnia after doing SSILD...  

A: Actually, performing SSILD correctly is likely to cure your insomnia. There is a 
remarkable resemblance between SSILD and Betty Erickson's self-hypnosis routine! Now 
back to the question. We need to first identify if we are taking about "real insomnia" or 
"false insomnia". Remember, SSILD likes to create these super realistic false awakenings. It 
is very possible for you to enter an FA while still performing the SSILD cycles. In this case 
you will be trying to fall asleep while you are already sleeping! Next time you find yourself 
unable to fall asleep during a cycle, you should definitely perform a reality check, no matter 
how convinced you are! For people who indeed suffers loss of sleep due to SSILD, I suggest 
you tweak your routines in two areas: 1. Reduce the amount of sleep before waking up for 
SSILD. 2. Reduce the time you spend on staying awake prior to the exercise. 

 

SAT - Sporadic Awareness Technique 

Here you will learn about my own variation of the DILD technique, which has accounted for more than 
ninety percent of my lucid count. I began lucid dreaming in 2009 and developed this technique over the first 
few days of being on Dreamviews, which improved my count to the point where I'd get up to 9 DILDs a 
week. I've been using the same method ever since! In summary, I use a combination of awareness and 
skepticism at random points throughout the day, which emulates the most common scenario of becoming 
lucid in a dream: when you become aware right out of the blue. 

Whether you're just starting out, or have been chasing down lucid dreams for months, I hope you enjoy 
reading this tutorial. Although I'm sure it can help you achieve your first LD or help you raise your LD count, 
remember that these are personal and somewhat unique techniques so don't be discouraged if they don't 
work right at first. Throughout the guide, the technique will be referred to as SAT, the acronym for sporadic 
awareness technique. I've done my best to ensure that you not only learn the technique, but understand in 
terms of basic dream lingo, why the technique works. 

First Steps 

About DILD 

The original DILD technique stands for dream initiated lucid dream, and is sometimes called the technique 
for beginners because it's considered easier to undertake than WILD, and less stressful on the dreamer. It 
involves the person becoming lucid, or aware that they're dreaming, when they're in the dream itself. 
Usually the dream has already commenced and the person becomes lucid through an epiphany or a burst of 
sudden awareness. DILD is one of the most common lucid dream induction techniques out there. 

Work on your recall! 

Being able to remember what you dreamed about, also known as recall, is important because if you can't 
remember your dreams, you won't remember your lucid ones either. At best, you may know you've had a 
lucid, but won't be able to remember the details. You should remember, minimally, 1 dream a night before 
trying SAT. 

How to improve your recall 

- When you wake, try just relaxing in bed with your eyes closed. Focus and think of key words, seeing if they 
resonate with something you dreamed about. Staying relaxed helps keep your brain in "sleep mode" for a 
few moments so you may be able to recall dreams easier. Sometimes, if you are just lying in bed, you might 
get fleeting images of what you dreamed about; from my own experiences, if you keep trying to bring those 
images back into your mind, the memories will grow into a fully remembered dream. 

 
 
 
 
- Go on Dreamviews and read other people's dreams to see if they remind you of one that you had. 

- Alcohol reduces the amount of time you spend in REM sleep, which is the time dreams are formed. Limit 
your intake if you're trying to recall dreams! 

- Drink some apple juice a few hours before hitting the hay. 

- Take some vitamin B6 - be sure to look for the proper dosage so you don't take too much. 

- When you wake up naturally during the night, record dreams you remember now - you might forget them 
later on. 

- Limit the amount of TV you watch, and the time you spend in front of your computer's bright screen 
before bed. Light is very stimulating and can keep you awake, reducing recall. 

- Keep a steady sleep schedule. Go to bed within an hour of the same time each night, and wake up the 
same time each morning, regardless of whether it's a weekend or weekday. 

About Awareness 

Let's start from the beginning. You may have heard that dreamers usually become lucid after doing reality 
checks or seeing dream signs. But, in 99% of cases, this isn't true - usually it happens the other way around: 
the person all of a sudden realizes they're dreaming, and then they use a reality check or look for a dream 
sign to back this fact up. Yes, dream signs and reality checks can trigger lucidity occasionally, but they don't 
work unless you're aware enough to notice them in the first place. If you only practice the motions of 
looking for dream signs and doing RCs without really putting thought into them, you'll end up doing them in 
your dreams without thinking about it. We have a habit of walking in real life so we will naturally walk in our 
dreams, but we think nothing of it. Making RCs into a habit and a routine procedure will do something 
similar, which won't necessarily help with becoming lucid. 

Also, dreams won't always contain dream signs. If you only train yourself to recognize a few, what about all 
the other ones that could appear? Do you really want to wait for a dream sign to pop up and reality check 
only when you see one? Or, you can work on overall awareness, reality checking anytime, so even if you 
don't see a dream sign you have a chance at lucidity. It should be mentioned that some peoples' dream 
signs involve the lights not working, or something that rarely ever happens. You can't reality check that 
much unless the lights are constantly going out. 

So as a rule, reality checks are almost always only used for confirmation and not to cause the actual lucidity. 
Think of how "lucidity" is defined - it means to have a certain clarity of mind and mental awareness, which 

 
 
 
 
 
you can't develop from simply going through the motions of a reality check. In fact, reality checks don't even 
need to be used at all to become lucid; awareness is all you need. You just have to be mindful. But RCs are 
still important because they are a way to confirm if you're in a dream. 

The "typical" dream induced lucid dream (DILD): 

1. The dreamer is totally unaware that he/she is dreaming, and is simply going about their normal business. 
Their surroundings don't necessarily have to look "off" or unusual in any way. 

2. The dreamer stops, suddenly conscious. "What the...? How did I get here?" 

3. It occurs to the dreamer that they could dreaming and they may repeat this out loud. "I must be 
dreaming!" they say, and then they perform a reality check, such as plugging their nose - if they are 
dreaming, they will be able to breathe normally through their nose. 

4. The reality check may work or fail; in other words, they may be able to breathe, or not be able to breathe. 

If the RC works (they can breathe) - the dreamer confirms that they are indeed in a dream, and proceeds to 
go off and do something after stabilization. 

If the RC fails (they can't breathe) - if the dreamer isn't very aware, they might go unconscious again and 
continue to go on without knowing it's a dream, but if they are conscious enough, they may perform 
another reality check just to make sure. This one will usually work, and they will then perform stabilization 
and proceed to do something in the dream. 

Here's a list of the most common reality checks, or RCs, used. 

Nose-plug:* plug your nose and see if you can breathe through it. In a dream, you'll be able to breathe. 

Finger-counting: check your hand and see if you have the right amount of fingers. In a dream you can have 
less or more fingers. 

Digital clock: look at the time on the clock, turn away, and look back to see if the time has changed. See if 
the time is unrealistic, such as 27:44 or 8:62. The time might also change right in front of your eyes. 

Reading: sometimes in dreams, writing is distorted or nonsensical. 

Finger-through-palm: Try pushing one of your fingers through the palm of your other hand. It may take a bit 
of effort, but if you're dreaming it will go right through as if you're a hologram. 

Lights: flick a light switch on and off to see if the light levels change. In dreams, there's a chance the 
switches won't work or the lights will be very dim. 

 
 
 
 
Location: Where are you right now, and can you recall how you got there? In a dream you can be 
somewhere with no memory of how you ended up there. 

Gravity: A cool but sometimes unreliable RC. Expect yourself to float upwards and see if you do. Or, simply 
see if you can feel gravity acting on you right now. 

Grogginess: In dreams, sometimes you're groggy and do things without really thinking about it. You may not 
be as "aware" of what's around you, which can lead to passive, nonchalant behavior in the dream. 

* Be sure to have the nose-plug RC in your lucid dreaming toolkit, because it's probably the most reliable 
one out there. 

Using SAT 

Applying awareness to the DILD technique 

To have a DILD, you have to practice waking awareness, or mindfulness, and really question if you could be 
dreaming at a given moment, so this will eventually carry over into your dreams. Awareness as a lucid 
induction technique, and not using RCs or dream signs, hasn't been emphasized greatly but now many 
people are realizing how much it helps to cause lucidity. This part of the guide will delve into how to use 
awareness to become lucid, which has a great chance of working if you do it correctly! 

When starting out using SAT, you may not feel genuinely suspicious as to whether you're dreaming. You 
could be thinking that since everything feels so real, it's "obvious" that you're awake. However, as you 
experience LDs and realize "how did I manage not to notice that I was dreaming before this?", you'll get the 
hang of it. Another thing to think about is how when you're dreaming, you accept it as reality. You don't 
question things, no matter how bizarre they may be, because in the dream it all feels realistic. Apply this 
principle to reality. The waking state feels real too, so you don't question it either. 

So really, what's the difference between dreaming and reality? You'll obviously know when you're awake, 
but you won't know when you're dreaming unless you are mindful. Saying this, don't accept things for face 
value until you confirm it with a RC and reason out to yourself why you're awake/asleep. Question your 
surroundings as genuinely as you can. 

Awareness is the conscious ability to perceive, to feel, or to be conscious of events, objects or sensory 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
patterns. In other words, it's taking into consideration the things you do during the day, what they feel like, 
sound like, and knowing why you're doing these specific things. If you're at the computer, you don't 
normally think about how the mouse feels under your hand, or how bright the screen it. But every once in a 
while, stop to focus on your eyes and see how they're squinting slightly from looking at the bright screen of 
the computer in the dark. Feel how the gravity pulls your hand down towards the mouse. Lift your hand up 
slightly, and let go, feeling it rest again on the mouse after a small impact. Did it hurt? Was it sudden? Do a 
reality check now - just because things feel real, it doesn't mean they are. 

You're walking down the sidewalk. You're clearly not dreaming, right? Think again - you haven't questioned 
anything yet, so stop moving and do a reality check. Maybe you should look at the details on the leaves, and 
feel the wind blowing against you. Can you see the individual bricks on the houses you're walking by? Take a 
break and lean against a building, feeling the hard texture of the construction on your back. 

You're inside your house at night time, sipping on a cup of coffee. Wait, and take a moment to simply see if 
the coffee looks real. Does the cup feel warm? Is there steam coming out of it? Can you look outside that 
window next to you and see the details of the buildings - even though it's dark, there's probably street lights 
illuminating parts of the area. If it's night in a dream, looking through a window to see what's outside can 
often result in blurry results; the buildings may be "off", or hazy. The roads can look funny. 

Here are some more examples on how to become aware. 

1. At completely randomized times, stop whatever you're doing and look around. Observe, does anything 
look distorted? Ask yourself if you're dreaming. Don't set the times that you'll be doing this up in advance, 
just do them when you remember. But if you have to remind yourself at the start, write a note. Be sure to 
stop using the reminder after a while, though! 

2. Each time you look at a digital clock to check the time, perform the digital clock reality check (look away 
and look back again to see if it's changed) and couple it with another one. Many people have access to a 
bedside alarm clock and computer. 

3. When reading a book, stop at random times and pick a line of text. Analyze and explain to yourself what 
the passage is telling the reader. 

4. When in on a conversation, listen to what the conversation is about and internally think about whether 
it's a realistic topic for the people speaking. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Perform the nose-plug reality check every time you get into bed, and get up in the morning. This check 
works even if the lights are out, and can help catch a false awakening (FA). 

6. If you're sitting on a chair, get up slightly and allow yourself to fall back into position. Is gravity working 
the way it should? You can also jump into the air and see how quickly you fall down. 

7. Another great way to test for reality is to expect something to happen, using standard dream control 
techniques - imagine your relative will come through the door at a given moment, for instance, and believe 
this 100%. Visualize them as they'd appear when walking through the door; know which way they'll be 
facing and how they'll act. If they do, you might be dreaming, especially if they shouldn't be in that location 
at present. 

8. Can you feel your heartbeat in your chest? Are you breathing? If so, is your breath warm or cold? Can you 
shift the focus of your eyes in order to look at something farther away? 

As you may have noticed, the key to SAT is to just stop what you're doing and then use awareness to 
heighten your consciousness. You can do your RCs anytime during this; I personally do a reality check (or 
two) after being observant for a few minutes, then do another one afterwards, "just in case" I might actually 
be dreaming. 

When going about your RCing and being aware, the more you slow down and really stop whatever you're 
doing, the better. If you were walking somewhere in your house, come to a halt; if you were drawing, stop 
moving the hand that you're drawing with. Doing this creates a sense of stillness that, if it happens in a 
dream, will stop you right in your tracks and promote awareness. The majority of my own lucids, along with 
many others', have started by the dreamer stopping what they're doing and questioning if they're dreaming, 
so emulating this in waking life is sure to have an impact on your lucidity. Another upside to stopping what 
you're doing is that it puts awareness on the forefront of your mind, which prevents your practices from 
becoming more like a passive "habit". 

Along with stopping what you're doing, it also helps to act like you're skeptical as to whether you're awake. 
You can think a few different lines in your head, or quietly speak to yourself. Here are some examples of 
what I use. 

Wait, why am I just ignoring everything around me? I could be dreaming right now. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Whoa, I should probably do a reality check because before I discovered I was dreaming last time, I just 
passively ignored everything around me. 

Hm... This feels real, but I have to see if I'm dreaming. 

If you're having trouble being skeptical, you can always reason out why you could (or couldn't) be dreaming 
once you stop what you're doing. For instance, you could say something like "I'm not dreaming right now 
because I am very aware, and I can't breathe through my plugged nose. If I were dreaming, I would be able 
to breathe and I might be a bit less aware, more groggy." 

How often and how long? 

It depends on the person. I stop and become aware once every two hours or so; others may do it more or 
less frequently, although I would do it no less than five times a day. This doesn't seem like a lot, but it can 
really have an impact on your dreams if you're thorough with using the technique at those five times. In 
terms of how long you're actually aware for during each stop, a good two or three minutes should do. If you 
can be observant and skeptical for more, then go for it! 

If you go by the minimum numbers above by stopping five times a day for two minutes each time, the SAT 
technique will only take 10 minutes out of your day (5x2 = 10)! Knowing this, you can now spend the 
remaining time to focus on any other methods you might want to supplement this one with (or the other 
way around). 

Awareness in a Dream 

Congratulations, you've achieved your first lucid! 

You're done the hardest step. Now comes a new issue that can happen to anyone who experiences their 
first lucid dream: excitement. Many people often wake up after experiencing their first lucid dream because 
they become overly excited, which can be a real bummer after all that hard work and trying to figure out 
your technique! But there are different ways to combat this. 

1. When you realize you're dreaming, stay as calm as you can. Try not to think about waking up. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Ground yourself in the dream by touching objects, feeling your dream body, and looking around. Slowly 
spinning around in a circle to see what's around you can help too - this helps by increasing your attention on 
the dream, and making your subconscious fill in missing parts of the location you're in, helping to stabilize it. 

3. Sometimes when people are lucid, they think of themselves lying in bed, instead of focusing on their 
presence in the dream. Whatever you do, don't think of yourself sleeping in bed! It will bring your focus on 
your physical body, and it just might wake you up. This is why touching objects is important in a dream; it 
helps you forget about your real body. 

4. Don't go along with the dream plot. There's a very good chance that you'll end up losing your lucidity 
because you become too involved with what was already happening. Go your own way and fly, or try to 
summon something, anything that will stop the dream's "preset" plot from progressing. Or, make your own 
plot up (remember - anything's possible!). 

5. As you have a few more lucid dreams, there's a chance that the burst of excitement you feel could end up 
becoming less intense, and then you'll only experience a mild excitement (but you'll still have the same 
amount of fascination with the dream world). You could develop a bigger tolerance for excitement - you 
may find yourself not waking up even if you "freak out". But still, be sure to stabilize the dream! 

Dream Control Tactics 

Anything is possible in a dream. What you've seen in movies, real life situations, and even your own 
fantastical, imaginative stories can come to life in a dream. All you need is the certainty that what you want 
to happen will happen. 

What I've learned about dream control is that it's all about being 100% sure, and expecting an outcome. 
Visualization is also very important, especially for those dream control scenarios where you want something 
to be as specific as possible. 

Try these basic dream control tasks if you're stuck on something to do in your next lucid. 

1. You're standing somewhere. Turn around and look behind you, fully believing a relative to be behind you. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As you turn around, visualize what they will look like - how tall they will be, what they may be wearing... You 
can make up a situation that will explain why they'd be behind you, too. For instance, you could expect your 
brother to be there and say, "stop following me" in an exasperated tone. 

2. Using the same idea, summon a plate with cake on it or another object. Know that it'll be there and 
imagine what it will look like. What color will the cake be, and what about the icing? Does it fill the plate or 
is it a small piece? If it helps, pretend someone left it there for you - it'll help make the situation more 
realistic and the dream may respond more appropriately. 

3. Superpowers. Many people want to try lifting a car or flying, but they don't know how. Use the same 
approach as above - if you want to punch through a wall, you could always know fully that you've had 
superpowers since you were born. Think this in the back of your mind and act as if it's completely natural to 
you. Don't doubt anything. 

More tips on control 

You can try daydreaming or visualizing something that you want to do in your next lucid, during the day. The 
more grounded the image becomes in your mind, the easier it'll be for it to happen in your dream. 

Don't make a big deal out of dream control; just act passively when you attempt to do something. Try not to 
"psych yourself up" for an activity, because there's nothing to really get psyched up for - if you treat dream 
control as some feat that has to be accomplished, it will be harder for you. So relax! 

 
 
 

VILD Tutorial 

This tutorial will teach you about VILD, an induction method devolped by Pedro, from 
another site. 

What does VILD stand for? 
VILD stands for Visually Incubated Lucid Dream. 

What is it?  
VILD is a method developed by Pedro from another site, and this tutorial has been adapted 
a bit to shorten and simplify his method. VILD involves incubating a dream which 
incorporates a reality check in your incubated dream. Its simple, yet ingenious.  

How To Do It  
1) Before you can do anything with this technique, you need to prepare yourself for your 
incubated dream right now. There are two basic guidelines for your dream incubation: 

* It needs to be simple and easily visualized.  
* It needs to incorporate a reality check (RC) 

For example, Pedro imagines himself in a room which is completely empty except for a 
door.. He manifests two of his best friends in his mind, and visualizes them being very 
excited.  

They will say "Did you know this a reality check competition? Do a reality check now!", and 
of course Pedro will visualize himself reality checking, and realizing he is dreaming.  

You then imagine yourself walking out the only door and repeat your visualization.  

My personal incubated dream: 
I imagine my self sitting on a chair, in the same room that Pedro utilizes. I imagine there are 
the two words, "Reality Check", written all over the room, on the walls, the door, and even 
me. I then imagine myself doing a reality check and becoming lucid - nearly the same 
procedure.  

2) Now that you have your incubated dream, you should probably perform a "wake back to 
bed" (WBTB) method to your liking: 

A. Once you have awaken, lie down in the most comfortable position possible.  
B. Gently imagine yourself in your dream you designed. Try to visualize it the best you 
possibly can. Make sure the dream is consistent, (ie: don't change the dream in the middle 
of it). 
C. After a while of doing this, you should do your reality check and actually realize it is in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fact, a dream. 
D. Enjoy!  

With this technique, I have a pretty high chance of becoming lucid, and Pedro says he has a 
100&#37; chance of becoming lucid.  

Voila! You now know VILD. 

 
 

WBTB 

WBTB is short for Wake Back To Bed and is when you wake up a few hours into sleep to 
increase your chances of achieving lucidity. WBTB is not a technique in itself, but enhances 
others to make them way more effective. 

How to Achieve WBTB 

In order to achieve a WBTB you only need to wake up a few hours into sleep and then go 
back to bed. For it to be as successful as possible you need to do some planning and give it 
a few tries. This is to find out a few important things: 

•  How long is my Sleeping Cycle? 

•  How many hours into sleep will work best for me? 

•  For how long do I stay up? 

1: We all have Sleeping Cycles that vary. To find out how long yours are, anytime you wake 
up during the night you make a little note which includes the time. In a week or so you 
should have enough information to make an estimate. You don't have to do this, but if you 
do, you'll be able to time them perfectly. 

2: The goal is to wake up near the end, or at the end of a REM Cycle. This is why you want to 
find out how long your Sleeping Cycle is. If you rarely wake up during the night you can just 
use the most common times which are either 4½ or 6 hours into sleep. Earlier than that and 
you don't spend much time in REM; later than that and you'll most likely have a hard time 
falling back asleep. This is something you have to find out by trying. 

3: A general rule is this: The longer you stay up, the higher chance of achieving lucidity; 
conversely the longer you stay up the harder it is to fall back asleep. Some people can't go 
back to sleep if they've been up for even a few minutes. If you experience this issue then I 
recommend keeping the WBTB's as short as possible. If you can stay up however, you 
should. You can stay awake for up to an hour, but between 20-40 minutes should be 
enough. How long you should stay up is also affected by when your WBTB occurs.  

Techniques and mindset 

When attempting a WBTB you need to be in the right mindset. You want to be determined 
and prepared even the night before, to reinforce the idea as you go to bed that the WBTB 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will get you lucid and believe that it will. Once you're awake you want to keep your thoughts 
on lucid dreaming and any task you've set up. Logging onto DreamViews or reading a lucid 
dreaming related book works great. 

As stated previously, WBTB is not a technique in itself, but more of a lucid aid. When 
combined with other techniques it increases chances of achieving lucidity tenfold rather 
than if you were to practice the technique on its own. WILD even requires you to perform a 
WBTB to work. MILD and WBTB is a great combination; just as you are about to enter REM 
and dream, any thoughts or mantras will likely carry over to the dream and aid in lucidity. 

Here's an example of how a proper WBTB looks like. 

22.00: Sleep time, set alarm at 04.00 which is six hours into sleep. Start visualizing certain 
tasks or do mantras. Look forward to doing the WBTB and getting lucid because of it. 

04.00: Alarm sounds. Shut it off and perform a Reality Check. Stay up for as long as you 
need to maintain awareness, usually 20 to 60 minutes. Try to look forward to going back to 
bed and getting lucid. Think "when I go back to bed, I will become lucid and fly to the 
moon." Combine this with a visualization of flying to the moon for greater effectiveness.  

04.30: Go back to sleep; keep in mind that once you fall asleep you will get lucid. Try to 
have it as your last thought. 

Last Notes 

Do not worry if the first few WBTB attempts don't succeed. Just try different amounts of 
time staying up or a different time for waking up. You can perform a WBTB any night during 
the week. I suggest you do it on nights you know you can afford to lose some sleep. 

That's all on WBTB. As usual, the more you believe it will get you lucid, the higher chance of 
it happening. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

WILD, without a shadow of a doubt, is one of the better and most powerful lucid dream 
induction methods. WILD is basically carrying your awareness from wake state to the 
dream state. Needless to say it's a difficult task, and beginners have several problems 
inducing a lucid dream using WILD. Here in this post, I'll describe some tricks, tips and 
adjustments for a successful WILD.  

Note: This is not a WILD tutorial, it is a collection of tricks, tips and adjustments based 
on my previous experiments and experiences with lucid dreaming and WILD.  

1: WILD + WBTB = WIN  

Most of beginners try to induce a lucid dream using WILD method when going to bed, 
most probably you'll never have a lucid dream this way, because dreams are generally 
formed during the REM phase of sleep (picture), which occurs after 45-180 minutes of 
sleep. So trying to induce a lucid dream using WILD when going to sleep like is waiting 
for a bus at the bus stop an hour before the bus arrives. Chances are you'll fall asleep 
at the bus stop. The proper way of performing WILD is:  

•  Set your alarm clock to wake you up after approximately 5 hours of sleep.  

•  Get up, don't turn on computer or TV (to maintain a good level of melatonin). 

Read a book, or your dream journal.  

•  After 45-60 minutes, return to your bed. The most vivid dreams will be ready for 

you.  

2: Relaxation  

Relaxation is very important in WILD. If you're not properly relaxed, your body will take 
additional time to fall asleep. Some good relaxation techniques are:  

•  Do stretch exercises during day time.  

• 

• 

(when in bed) Imagine yourself floating in zero gravity vacuum.  

Imagine yourself moving at the speed of light.  

•  Focus on the part of the body your want to relax, and imagine it releasing it's 

weight.  

•  Use of relaxation music for stimulating your muscles and brain. Classical, 

piano, flute, violin and cello recommended.  

3: The Hypnagogia  

After a few minutes of relaxation, you have to concentrate on your breathing or 
heartbeat. Within minutes you'll start seeing random patterns of light in the dark of 
your eyelids, known as hypnagogic imagery. You may also hear sounds, and feel 
sensations all over you body. It's completely normal, if you panic, chances are you'll 
wake your physical body and you'll need to start over.  

I don't see any hypnagogic imagery, what am I doing wrong?  

There are three possible reasons for not seeing hypnagogic imagery: A: Your brain is 
still not in the REM or pre-REM (NREM 3-2) phase. That means you ignored my first tip. 
B: Your body is still awake, that means you ignored my second tip. C: You're too alert 
(or excited) to induce the REM phase and/or deceive your brain to make your body fall 
asleep.  

4: Natural Reflexes  

Natural spasms, jerks and reflexes don't usually mess with the WILD. However if 
you're about to enter the REM, and suddenly you start breathing heavy (because of the 
excitement or panic), you'll most probably ruin your attempt at WILD. The most 
challenging reflex for me was the "saliva swallowing reflex". Hundreds of times I was 
about to enter the final REM, but then I swallowed and returned to the NREM phase. 
Later I started sleeping on my shoulder instead of back, this pretty much helped the 
saliva make its way down naturally. The key is not to fight the reflex, but to let it pass. 
With time and regular practice, you'll gain control over your reflexes too.  

5: Stay Awake  

If you fall asleep every time performing WILD, try the following methods descried 
below:  

•  Keep your forearm raised perpendicular to the bed, and the body.  

•  Change your default sleeping position.  

•  Try sleeping on a couch, or on a different bed.  

6: Entering The Dream  

If you performed all the steps correctly and maintained your awareness to the REM 
phase, you'll start seeing more complex hypnagogic imagery (usually 3D). Once you 
start seeing it, do not try to interact with it for a while. After a few minutes, when the 
imagery gets more stable and clear, imagine yourself (from a first person view) in 
there, and .. you're there!  

7: Sleep Paralysis  

If you get caught in a sleep paralysis before/during/after performing WILD, all you have 
to do is stay calm and concentrate on your breathing. You would not be able to move 
any part of your body, except eyes (in most cases, a number of muscles can be 
moved). If you try to move you body, and break the sleep paralysis, you would 
unintentionally activate the part of your brain responsible for hallucinations. It could 
be anything, from gorgeous ponies eating your bed sheet, to your brain trolling you 
hard by making a 3D thriller right there in your bedroom. If you simply concentrate on 
your breathing, instead of thinking hard about all the horror movies you've seen in 
past, most likely you won't hallucinate.  

The key is to stay calm, and let your brain know, who is the boss!  

8: Stabilization  

Wouldn't it be frustrating if your lucidity lasted only a minute or two, after almost half 
an hour of successful WILD induction? You bet. Check out my previous post for dream 
stabilization.  

9: Ending A Dream  

It is highly recommended to wake up after 30-40 minutes of dreaming. However if you 
continue, most probably you'll forget 80% of your dream when you wake up. After 
waking up, do not go back to sleep for at least 2 hours. If you do, all you would 
remember is a faint memory of a successful WILD induction.  

If WILD didn't work for you, don't lose your hope on lucid dreaming. There are many 
other methods of lucid dreaming, as powerful as WILD, VILD, is one of them. Check 
out my previous post on VILD here.  

Glad to help. Thanks.  

 

