DEILD 

DEILD stands for Dream Exit Initiated Lucid Dream. DEILD is also sometimes called 
"Dream Chaining." A DEILD is basically a shortened WILD. DEILD has the potential to let 
you have multiple lucid dreams each night. This technique takes advantage of the fact that 
as you awaken from a dream the brain remains in dream mode for a few moments, 
provided you don't move too much. Since your brain is still using REM waves, you can easily 
slip back into a dream without having to trick your body into falling asleep. However, if you 
are at the end of a REM phase you won't be able to DEILD. If you hit the right timing and are 
able to keep yourself conscious while you drift back to sleep, you'll find that it's relatively 
easy to enter in a dream lucid. 
. 

Background 

The DEILD technique had been around for a while. Many lucid dreamers have stumbled 
across this technique in their own in their pursuit of LDs. Dr. Steven LaBerge outlined this 
technique in some of his books. 

Preparation. 

Dream Recall 

In order to DEILD you have to have good dream recall. Not only so you won't forget your 
DEILD adventures, but also because you need to be aware enough of your dreams that you 
know when one has just ended. It is ideal to establish decent dream recall since it can be 
much easier to reenter the dream if it is still clearly recalled once you wake up, as opposed 
to visualizing a completely new one (which you may also do if you prefer). 
. 

Awakening After a Dream 

Since DEILD relies on your ability to wake up as a dream ends, you obviously need to be 
able to do this on a regular basis. Many people wake up briefly after each dream already, 
but are unaware of it. There a few ways to become aware of these awakenings: 

- Some people use an alarm of some kind to wake them up during the night. A vibrating cell 
phone can be used, too. You will need an alarm that turns itself off after a few seconds. The 
shorter the duration of the alarm the better, as you don't want it to disturb you too much. 
Set it to go off after between 3-6 hours of sleep. You'll have to experiment to find the best 
time for you. If you want, you can also set it to go off every half hour after that, to give you a 

 
 
 
 
 
 
greater chance of waking from a dream. 

- Some people train themselves to recognize the look of their closed eyes, because this will 
signal that they have just woken up. To do this close your eyes while going to sleep for the 
night. Spend about a minute looking at the backs of your eyelids. Over time you should 
start to instantly recognize, even when groggy and half-awake, that your eyes are closed 
and that is a signal that you have just woken from a dream.  

If you don't like the idea of an alarm waking you up you can try going to bed a couple of 
hours early. Many people find this causes them to wake up during the night more than they 
normally do. 

Another way to skip the alarm is to use autosuggestion. With this method you come up with 
a short sentence or phrase (your "mantra") that sums up your desire, in this case to be 
aware of waking up after every dream. An example of a mantra you can use is, "I will be 
aware of waking after every dream." To get the most out of autosuggestion repeat your 
mantra over and over several times a day. The more you do it the faster and better it will 
work. A good way to make sure you do it enough is to repeat it: 

•  Every time, the whole time as you use the bathroom. 

•  Whenever you wait in line or have other "down" time. 

•  Whenever you walk through a doorway. 

•  As you get ready for bed. 

•  For several minutes as you lay in bed. 

How to DEILD. 

Once your dream recall is good and you are aware of waking after many of your dreams you 
are ready to start DEILDing! When done properly the whole process generally takes less 
than a minute from awake to a lucid dream state. 

You awake after in a dream. Now try to hold still and avoid if possible opening your eyes. 
Even though scratching your nose or moving a bit does not end your chances, excessive 
wakefulness can cause your brain to come out of REM. You need to keep your mind awake, 
but still in that dreamy, in-between state.  

Now a dream will form around you. At this stage you may feel some Hypnagogic 
Hallucinations, since DEILD is a kind of WILD. 
. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hints on Staying Still 

• 

If you find it is hard for you to remember to stay still as you awake you can use 
autosuggestion to plant that goal in your mind. 

•  Another useful way of staying still is to set two alarms, one fifteen minutes or so 

before you attempted to DEILD. When it goes off, go back to sleep, but affirm that 
next time you wake up you will stay still. Because you did your affirmation so closely 
to the DEILD attempt, it is very fresh and your mind. 

. 

Hints on Entering the Dream 

•  You can enter a dream scenario of your choice by imagining it while you lay still 

waiting for the dream to form. This is harder to do than dream reentry. 

•  You can reenter your last dream by simply thinking about it. Most people find this 

the easiest way to shape a dream while DEILDing. 

• 

If you are more of a tactile person, you can imagine the sensation of movement or of 
touching something to help you get into a dream. As an added bonus, when you 
actually can "feel" the movement or object you know your dream body is feeling it 
and you are in the dream. This acts as a built in RC. 

•  Be aware of the false awakenings. Most WILDs will start with one. If you think you've 

failed the DEILD, make sure with a reality check. 

. 

Chaining 

Many people use DEILD not as a technique to become lucid, but as a method for staying 
lucid. Dreamers (especially ones who are new to lucid dreaming) tend to wake up soon 
after becoming lucid. The DEILD technique allows the dreamer to go back into the dream 
and continue it. The way to perform is right when you realize that the dream is about to end. 
You might know this depending on the time you started your DEILD, or if you can't seem to 
prevent the scenario from fading. At this point, you want to focus on your intention of 
waking up and remaining motionless, while also keeping focus on any dream imagery 
residue that might allow you the opportunity to enter in the next dream. 

 
 
 
