Perceptual and  Motor Skills, 1981, 52,  727-732.  @ Perceptual  and Motor  Skills  1981 

LUCID  DREAMING  VERIFIED  BY  VOLITIONAL  COMMUNICATION ' 
DURING  REM  SLEEP1 

STEPHEN  P.  LABERGE,  LYNN  E.  NAGEL,  WILLIAM  C.  DEMENT, 
A N D   VINCENT  P.  ZARCONE,  JR. 

Stanford University 

Summary.-The 

occurrence  of  lucid  dreaming  (dreaming while  being  con- 
scious  that  one  is  dreaming)  has  been  verified  for  5  selected  subjects  who 
signaled  that  they  knew  they  were  dreaming  while  continuing to  dream  during 
unequivocal  REM  sleep.  The  signals  consisted  of  particular  dream  actions 
having  observable  concomitants  and  were  performed  in  accordance  with  pre- 
sleep  agreement.  The  ability  of  proficient  lucid  dreamers  to  signal  in  this 
manner  makes possible  a  new  approach  to  dream  research-such 
subjects,  while 
lucid,  could  carry  out  diverse  dream  experiments  marking  the  exact  time  of 
particular  dream  events,  allowing  derivation  of  precise  psychophysiological 
correlations  and  methodical  testing  of  hypotheses. 

That  we  sometimes dream  while  knowing  that  we  are dreaming  was  first 
noted  by -Aristotle.  According  to  accounts  of  conscious  or  "lucid"  dreaming, - 
as  this phenomenon  is  commonly  termed,  the dreamer  can  possess  a  conscious- 
ness  fully  comparable  in  coherence,  clarity,  and  cognitive  complexity  to  that 
of  the  waking  state,  while  continuing  to  dream  vividly  (Van  Eeden,  1913; 
Brown,  1936;  Green,  1968;  Tart,  1979;  LaBerge,  1980b).  As  a  result  of 
theoretical  assumptions  about  the  nature  of  dreaming,  contemporary  dream  re- 
searchers  have  questioned  whether  these  experiences  take  place  during  sleep 
or  during  brief  periods  of  hallucinatory  wakefulness.  The  purpose  of  the 
present  study  was  to give an empirical  answer  to  this  question  by  determining 
the  physiological  conditions  in  which  lucid  dreaming  occurs. 

Our experimental approach  was suggested  by  previous  investigations  (An- 
trobus,  et  al.,  1965;  Salamy,  1970; Brown  & Cartwright,  1978), showing  that 
sleeping  subjects  are  sometimes  able  to  produce  behavioral  responses  highly 
correlated  with  dreaming.  Since  these  subjects  have  not,  according  to  Cart- 
wright  (1978), been  conscious  of  making  the  responses,  these  earlier  studies 
do  not  provide  evidence  for  voluntaty  action  (and  thus,  reflective  conscious- 
ness)  during  sleep.  However,  we  reasoned  that  what  could  be  done  uncon- 
sciously could  also  be  done  consciously. 

The  experience  of  one  of  us  (S.P.L.)  indicated  that,  if  subjects  became 
aware  they  were  dreaming,  they  could  also  remember  to  perform  previously 

'The  writing  of  this  manuscript  was  supported,  in  part,  by  the  Holmes  Center  for  Re- 
search  in  Holistic  Healing.  W e  are  grateful  to  Drs.  J.  van  den  Hoed  and  R.  Coleman 
for  h e l ~ f u l  comments  and  Mr.  R.  Baldwin.  Ms.  S.  Bornstein,  and  Mr.  S.  Coburn  for 
expert  iechnical  assistance.  . Request  reprints  from  Stephen  P.  LaBerge,  Ph.D.,  Sleep 
Research  Center,  Stanford  University,  School  of  Medicine,  Stanford,  CA  94305. 

728 

S.,P.  LA  BERGE,  ET  AL. 

intended  dream  actions.  Because  dreamed  gaze  and  limb  actions  have  some- 
times  shown  very  good  corre!ations  with  polygraphically  recorded  eye  move- 
ments  and  muscle  activation  (Rechtschaffen,  1973),  it  seemed  plausible  that 
lucid  dreamers  could  signal  that  they  knew  they  were  dreaming  by  means  of 
intentional  dream  actions  having  observable  physiological  correlates. 

METHOD AND  RESULTS 

Five  subjects,  trained  in  the  method  of  lucid  dream  induction  (MILD) 
described  by  LaBerge  (1980c),  were  selected  on  the  basis  of  their  claimed 
ability to have  lucid dreams  on demand, and studied  for  2  to 20 nonconsecutive 
nights  (see  Table  1 ) .   Standard  polysomnograms  (Rechtschaffen  &  Kales, 
1968), i.e., electroencephalogram  (EEG) . electro-oculogram  (EOG ) , and  chin 
electromyogram  (EMG), were  recorded,  as  well  as  left  and  right  wrist  EMG 
(for  signaling).  The  subjects  attempted  to  follow  a  predetermined  procedure 
of  signaling  whenever  they  became  aware  that  they  were  dreaming.  A  variety 
of  signals  were  specified,  generally  consisting  of  a  combination  of  dreamed 
eye  movemehts  and  a  pattern  of  left  and  right  dream-fist  clenches.  The  sub- 
jects  demonstrated  the  signals  during pre-recording calibrations  but  were  asked 
not  to practice  further while  awake. 

In  the  course  of  the  study,  35  lucid  dreams  were  reported  subsequent  to 
spontaneous awakening  from ~ a r i o u s ' s t a ~ e s  of  sleep as  follows:  rapid-eye-move- 
ment  (REM)  sleep  in  32  cases,  non-REM  ( S R E M )   Stage  1 twice,  and  dur- 
ing  the  transition  from  NREM  Stage 2  to  REM  once. 

The  subjects  reported  signaling  during  30  of  these  lucid  dreams.  After 
each  recording,  the  reports  mentioning  signals  were  submitted  along  with  the 
respective  polysomnogram  to  a  judge  uninformed  of  the  times  of  the  reports. 

TABLE  1 
SUMMARY OF LUCID DREAM SIGNALING EXPERIMENTS 

Subject 
(age, sex ) 

Nights 
recorded 

Lucid  dreams  reported 
(sleep stage) 

Lucid  dream signals 
verified*/reported 

S.L.  (32 yr.,  M )  
R.K.  (28 yr.,  M )  
L.L.  (34 yr.,  F )  

B.K.  (27 yr.,  F )  

S.P.  (26 yr.,  M )  

20 
4 
2 

6 

2 

17  (REM) 
5  (REM) 
1  (REM) 
2  (NREM-1) 
6  (REM) 
1  (NREM-2/REM)  + + 
2  (REM) 

14/15 
3/5 
0 / 0  
0 + / 1  
5 / 6  
o/o 
2/2 

*Blindly  matched  for  correspondence  between  reporred  and  observed  signals. 
+On  awakening from NREM  Stage  1 sleep  ( 2  min.  after  having  awakened  from  REM), 
the  subject  reported  performing  the  agreed-upon  signal  during  a  vivid  and  lengthy  lucid 
dream.  However,  neither  her  EOG  nor  wrist  EMG  showed  any  sign  of  the  reported 
signals,  as  might  be  expected  from  the  normal  lack  of  correspondence  between  dream 
gaze  and  eye  movements  during  descending  Stage  1  sleep  (Rechtschaffen,  1973). 
+ +The  subject awoke,  in  this  case,  during  the  transition  from  NREM  Stage 2  to  REM. 

LUCID  DREAMING 

729 

The  judge  was  asked  to  determine  whether  one  (or  none)  of  the  polysom- 
In  24 
nographic  epochs  corresponded  with  the  reported  lucid  dream  signal. 
cases,  the  judge  was  able  to  select  the  appropriate  30-sec.  epochs  (out  of 
about  1000 per  polysomnogram)  on  the  basis  of  correspondence  between  re- 
ported  and  observed  signals  (Table  1 ) .   The  probability  that  the  selections 
were  correct  by  chance  alone  is  astronomically  small.  All  signals  associated 
with  lucid  dream  reports  occurred  during  epochs  of  unambiguous  REM  sleep 
scored  according to the standard  criteria  (Rechtschaffen  & Kales,  1968).  The 
lucid  dream  signals were  followed  by  an  average  of  1 min.  (range:  5  to  450 
sec.)  of  uninterrupted  REM  sleep. 

Inspection  of  the  polysomnographic  epochs  preceding  the  lucid  dream 
signal  reports  suggested  the  failures  with  blind  matching  (the  "false  nega- 
tives")  were  due  to  high  baseline  EOG  and  wrist  EMG  activity,  resulting  in 
an  unfavorable  signal-to-noise  ratio.  However,  no  clear  instances  of  signals 
were  observed  except  where  reported,  i.e.,  there  were  no  "false  positives."  On 
the other hand,  in many  cases, the  reported  signals  were  unequivocal  (see  Figs. 
1  and  2 ) .   The  most  reliable  signal  was  a  series  of  extreme  horizontal  eye 
movements  (left, right,  left,  right.) 

P 
h a  

L L L   L 

L L  

J 

1  " '  

I 

FIG. 1.  Polygraph  record of  a subject  signaling  that  he knows  he  is  dreaming.  The 
subject  awoke  approximately  20  sec.  after  this  excerpt  and  reported  recognizing  that  he 
was  dreaming  and  performing  the  agreed  upon  signal  in  the  dream,  i.e.,  he  directed  his 
dream gaze upwards  momentarily  ( U )   and  then  executed  a sequence of  dreamed  left  ( L )  
and  right  ( R )   fist  clenches, Morse  code  for  S.L., the  subject's  initials.  Note  that  unlike 
the  predominantly  horizontal  eye  movements  (above  right),  the  extreme  upward  eye 
movement  ( U )   produces  characteristic  artifact  in  the  EEG  channel.  All  three  of  the 
scoring  criteria  for  REM  sleep  are  met:  low  amplitude  chin  EMG,  episodic  REMs,  and 
low-voltage,  mixed-frequency  EEG  (Rechrschaffen  &  Kales,  1968).  The  EEG  shows 
occasional  10-Hz (alpha)  activity as  is  normal  during  REM  sleep  (Rechtschaffen,  1973); 
integration  of  the  alpha  band-pass  filtered  EEG  showed  the  amount  of  alpha  activity 
during the  lucid  dream  did  not  significantly  differ  from  that  during  the  preceding  non- 
lucid  portion  of  the  REM  period. 

(Calibrations:  50pV; 5  sec.) 

730 

S.  P.  LA  BERGE,  ET  AL. 

The most  complicated  signal  (shown  in  Fig.  1) consisted  of  a  single up- 
ward  dream-eye  movement  followed  by  a  series  of  left  (L)  and  right  ( R )  
dream-fist  clenches  in  the  order  "LLL  LRLL."  This  sequence  is  equivalent  to 
- 
the  subject's  initials  in  Morse  code  (LLL  = . . . = S;  LRLL  = . --  . . - 
L).  The complexity of  this  signal argues against  the possibility  that  the EMG 
discharges  might be  spontaneous. 

That  all  cases  of  lucid  dream  signaling  occurred  during  epochs  scored  as 
REM  sleep  specifies,  to  a  certain  extent,  the  physiology  of  lucid  dreaming  as 
"a  relatively  low  voltage,  mixed  frequency  EEG  in  conjunction  with  episodic 
REMs  and  low  amplitude  electromyogram  (EMG)"  (Rechtschaffen  & Kales, 
1968).  This  definition  allows  variation  in  the  three  parameters,  the  details 
of  which  will  be  reported  elsewhere. 
In  brief,  the variations  in the  EEG  pat- 
terns  of  the  lucid  dream  polysomnograms  were  typical  of  REM  sleep,  i.e., 
sporadic  "saw-tooth"  waves  as  well  as  alpha  and  theta  rhythm,  and  not  wake- 
fulness.  The  occasional,  but  normal,  appearance  of  alpha  rhythm  ( a   brain 
wave  usually  associated  with  wakefulness),  in  the  EEG  during  REM  periods 
raises  the  possibility  that  lucid  dreaming  could  occur  during  momentary  par- 
tial  arousals  or  "micro-awakenings"  (Schwartz  & Lefebvre,  1973).  However, 
alpha  rhythm  need  not  be  present  during  lucid  dream  signaling,  as  is  shown 
by  Fig.  2.  Furthermore,  some  of  the  lucid  dreams  were  several  minutes  long, 
ruling out any  explanation  based  on  the  notion  of  brief  intrusions  of  wakeful- 
ness. 

(A)  AWAKE 

(B)  LUCID  DREAM 

FIG. 2.  Comparison  of  EEG  (C3/A2)  .during  lucid  dream  signaling  ( B )   and  im- 
mediately  after  awakening  ( A ) .   The  continuous  waking  alpha  (10  Hz)  activity  for 
this  subject  is  clearly  distinct  from  the  mixed  frequency  patterns  during  REM  sleep. 
Although  other  EEG  paaerns  are  compatible  with  wakefulness, the  tracing  illustrated  is 
the  pattern  normally  exhibited  when  subjects  awaken  from  sleep.  The  2- to  4-Hz EEG 
activity  prominent  in  the  lucid  dream  sample  ( B )   is  highly  characteristic of  REM  sleep. 
(Calibrations:  50  pV;  1  sec.) 

How  do we  know  that  the  subjects  were  "really  asleep"  whe.n  they  com- 
If  we  allow  perception  of  the  external  world  as a 

municated  the  signals? 

DISCUSSION 

LUCID  DREAMING 

731 

criterion  of  being  awake,  we  can  conclude  the  subjects  were  indeed  asleep: 
Although  they  knew  they  were  in  the  laboratory,  this  knowledge  was  a  mat- 
ter  of  memory,  not  perception;  upon  awakening,  they  reported  having  been 
totally  in  the dream  world  and  not  in  sensory  contact  with  the  external  world. 
Neither  were  the  subjects  merely  not  attending  to  the  environment,  e.g.,  as 
when  absorbed  in reading or daydreaming;  according to  their reports, they  were 
specifically  aware of  the  absence  of  sensory  input  from  the  external  world. 
If 
subjects  were  to  claim  to  have  been  awake  while  showing  physiological  signs 
of  sleep,  or  vice  versa,  we  might  doubt  their  subjective  reports.  However,  in 
the present  case, the subjective accounts  and  physiological  measures  are  in  clear 
agreement,  and  it would  be  extremely  unparsimonious  to  suppose  that  subjects 
who  believed  themselves  to  be  asleep  while  showing  physiological  indications 
of  sleep were  actually  awake. 

The  two  principal  conclusions  of  this  study  are  that  lucid  dreaming  can 
occur  during  REM  sleep  and  that  it  is  possible  for  lucid  dreamers  to  signal 
intentionally  to  the  environment  while  continuing  to  dream.  These  findings 
have  both  theoretical  and  pfactical  consequences.  The  first  result  shows  that 
under  certain  circumstances,  dream  cognition  during  REM  sleep  can  be  much 
more  reflective  and  rational  than  has  been  commonly  assumed.  Evidence  in- 
dicating that  lucid  dreaming  is  a learnable  skill  (LaBerge,  1979, 1980a,  1980b, 
1980c),  taken  with  the  second  result,  suggests  the  feasibility  of  a  new  ap- 
proach  to  dream  research:  lucidly  dreaming  subjects  could  carry  out  diverse 
experiments  marking  the  exact  time  of  occurrence  of  particular  dream  events, 
which  would  allow  the  derivation  of  precise  psychophysiological  correlations 
and  methodical testing  of  hypotheses. 

REFERENCES 

ANTROBUS, J.  S.,  ANTROBUS, J.  S.,  &  FISHER, C.  Discriminarion of  dreaming  and  non- 

dreaming sleep.  Archives  of  General  Psychiutry,  1965,  12,  395-401. 

BROWN, A.  E.  Dreams  in  which  the  dreamer knows he  is  asleep.  Journal  o f  Abnormal 

and  Sock1  Psychology,  1936,  31,  59-66. 

BROWN, J.  N.,  &  CARTWRIGHT, R.  Locating  NREM  dreaming  through  instrumental 

responses.  Psychophysiology,  1978,  15,  35-39. 

CARTWRIGHT, R. 

[Response  to  review  of  Brown  and  Cartwright  (1978).] 

Sleep 

Reviews,  1978,  166,  30. 

GREEN, C.  Lucid  dreams.  London:  Hamilton,  1968. 
IABERGE, S.  Lucid  dreaming:.some  personal  observations.  Sleep  Research,  1979,  8, 

153. 

IABERGE, S.  P.  Induction  of  lucid  dreams.  Sleep  Research,  1980,  9,  138. 
LABERGE, S.  P.  Lucid  dreaming:  an  exploratory  study  of  consciousness  during  sleep. 
(University  Microfilms  International. 

( a )  

Ph.D. dissertation, Stanford Univer.,  1980. 
80-24,  691) 

( b )  

LABERGE, S. P.  Lucid  dreaming as  a learnable skill:  a case study.  Perceptual  and  Motor 

Skills.  1980.  51.  1039-1042. 

( c )  
.  . 

RECHTSCHAFFEN, A.  T h e  psychophysiology  of  mental  activity  during  sleep. 

In  F.  J. 

732 

S.  P.  LA  BERGE,  ET  AL. 

McGuigan  & R.  A.  Schoonover  (Eds.),  The psychophysiology  of thinking.  New 
York:  Academic  Press,  1973.  Pp.  153-200. 

RECHTSCHAFFEN, A.,  &  KALES, A.  (Eds.)  A  manual  of  standardized  terminology, 
techniques  and  scoring  system  for  sleep  stages  o f   human  subjects.  Washington, 
(National  Institute  of 
D.C.:  United  States  Government  Printing  Office,  1968. 
Health  Publication  No.  204) 

S A L A ~ ,  J.  Instrumental  responding  to  internal  cues  associated  with  REM  sleep.  Psy- 

chonomic  Science,  1970,  18,  342-343. 

SCHWARTZ, B.  A,,  &  LEFEBVRE, A.  Contacts  veille/P.M.O.  11:  Les  P.M.O.  morcelees. 
Revue  d'Electroencephalographie et  de  Nelrrophysiologie  Clinique,  1973,  3,  165- 
176. 

TART, C.  S.  From  spontaneous  event to lucidity:  a review  of  attempts to control  nocturnal 
In  B.  B.  Wolman  (Ed.),  Handbook  of  dreams.  New  York:  Van 

dreaming. 
Nostrand  Reinhold,  1979.  Pp.  226-268. 

VANEEDEN, F.  A.  A  study  of  dreams.  Proceedings  of the  Society  for Psychical  Research. 
[Reprinted  in  C.  T.  Tart  (Ed.),  Altered  states  of  conscious- 

1913,  26,  431-461. 
ness.  New York:  Wiley,  1969.  Pp.  145-1581 

Accepted  April  7 ,  1981. 

