Mnemonic Induction of Lucid Dreams (MILD) 
(From “Exploring the World of Lucid Dreaming” by Stephen LaBerge) 

Ten years ago, I developed an effective method of lucid dream induction while investigating the 
feasibility of learning to have lucid dreams at will for my Ph.D. dissertation work. 

Before trying induction procedures, I remembered less than one lucid dream per month. While 
using autosuggestion during the first sixteen months of my study (the technique is presented 
below), I recalled an average of five lucid dreams per month with a range of one to thirteen. 
(The month in which I had thirteen lucid dreams using autosuggestion happened while I was 
doing my first laboratory studies of lucid dreaming, which incidentally illustrates the powerful 
effect of motivation on the frequency of lucid dreaming.) However, during the period I was using 
autosuggestion to induce lucid dreams, I had no understanding of how I was doing it! All I knew 
was that I was telling myself before bed: “Tonight, I will have a lucid dream.” But how? I had no 
idea. And having no idea meant that there was little I could do to make it happen. Without 
understanding the process involved, I stood little chance of learning to have lucid dreams at will. 

Nevertheless, I gradually observed a psychological factor that correlated with the occurrence of 
my lucid dreams: the presleep intention to remember to recognize I was dreaming. Once I knew 
how I was trying to induce lucid dreams, it became much easier to focus my efforts. This 
clarification of intention was followed by an immediate increase in the monthly frequency of my 
lucid dreams. Further practice and refinements led to a method whereby I could reliably induce 
lucid dreams. With this new method, I had as many as four lucid dreams in one night and as 
many as twenty- six in one month. I now could have a lucid dream on any night I chose and had 
accomplished my goal of showing that it is possible to bring access to the lucid dream state 
under volitional control. For people who were willing and able to learn my method, it was now 
possible to enter the world of lucid dreaming almost at will. 

Once I knew that I was trying to remember to do something (that is, become lucid) at a later time 
(that is, when next I’m dreaming), I was able to devise a technique to help me accomplish that. 
How can we manage to remember to do something in a dream? Perhaps we should start with a 
simpler question: How do we remember to do things in ordinary life? 

In everyday life we remember most things we have to do by using some sort of external 
mnemonic or memory aid (a grocery list, phone pad, string around the finger, memo by the door, 
etc.). But how do we remember future intentions (this is called prospective memory) without 
relying on external reminders? Motivation plays an important role. You are less likely to forget to 
do something that you really want to do. 

When you set yourself the goal to remember to do something, you have made the goal one of 
your current concerns and thereby have activated a goal-seeking brain system that will stay 
partially activated until you have achieved it. If the goal is very important to you, the system 
stays highly activated and you keep checking to see if it’s time to do it, until it is time. It never 
becomes fully unconscious. But the more typical case is when, for example, you decide to buy 

 
 
 
 
 
 
some tacks the next time you go to the store. This is hardly important enough to keep on the 
front page of your mind, so you go to the store and forget about your intention. That is, unless 
while at the store you just happen to notice a box of tacks, or even a hammer which brings up 
tacks by association. 

This reveals the other major factor involved in remembering to do things: association. When 
facing the challenge of remembering to do something, we can increase the likelihood of success 
by (1) being strongly motivated to remember and (2) forming mental associations between what 
we want to remember to do and the future circumstances in which we intend to do it. These 
associations are greatly strengthened by the mnemonic (memory aid) of visualizing yourself 
doing what you intend to remember. 

Thinking of lucid dream induction as a problem of prospective memory, I developed a technique 
designed to increase my chances of remembering my intention to be lucid: the Mnemonic 
Induction of Lucid Dreams procedure, (MILD).13 I have revised the procedure for this book in 
light of my experience, both using the technique myself to produce lucid dreams and teaching it 
to hundreds of others. Please take note of the prerequisites discussed below. 

MILD Prerequisites 

To successfully induce lucid dreams with MILD, you need to have certain capacities. First of all, 
if you can’t reliably remember to carry out future intentions while awake, there is little chance 
that you will remember to do anything while asleep. So before attempting MILD, you need to 
prove to yourself that you can indeed remember to do things while awake. If you are like most 
people, you are used to relying on external reminders and therefore need practice in 
remembering intentions using only your own mental power. The following is an exercise to help 
you acquire the necessary skill to perform the MILD technique. 

Exercise: Prospective Memory Training 

Read the day’s targets 
This exercise is designed to be practiced over an entire week. Below is a set of four target 
events for each day of the week. When you get up in the morning, read only the targets for that 
day. (Do not read the targets before the proper day.) Memorize the day’s targets. 

Look for your targets during the day 
Your goal is to notice the next occurrence of each event, at which time you will perform a state 
test: “Am I dreaming?” So, if your target is, “The next time I hear a dog bark, “when you hear this 
next, note it and do a state test. You are aiming to notice the target once – the next time it 
happens. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Keep track of how many target events you hit 
At the end of the day, write down how many of the four targets you succeeded in noticing (you 
can make a space in your dream journal to record your progress with this exercise). If you 
realize during the day that you missed your first chance to notice one of your targets, then you 
have failed to hit that target, even though you may notice its occurrence later in the day. If you 
are certain that one or more of the targets did not occur at all during the day, say so with a note 
in your dream journal. 

Continue the exercise for at least one week 
Practice the exercise until you have tried all of the daily targets given below. If at the end of the 
week, you are still missing most of the targets, continue until you can hit most of them. Make up 
your own list of targets, keep track of your success rate, and observe how your memory 
develops. 

Daily Targets  

Sunday 

The next time I see a pet or animal 
The next time I look at my face in a mirror The next time I turn on a light 
The next time I see a flower 
The next time I see a flower 

Monday 

The next time I write anything down The next time I feel pain 
The next time I hear someone say my name The next time I drink something 

Tuesday 

The next time I see a traffic light The next time I hear music 
The next time I throw something in the garbage The next time I hear laughter 

Wednesday 

The next time I turn on a television or radio The next time I see a vegetable 
The next time I see a red car The next time I handle money 

Thursday 

The next time I read something other than this list The next time I check the time 
The next time I notice myself daydreaming The next time I hear the telephone ringing 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Friday 

The next time I open a door The next time I see a bird 
The next time I use the toilet after noon The next time I see the stars 

Saturday 

The next time I put a key in a lock The next time I see an advertisement 
The next time I eat anything after breakfast The next time I see a bicycle 

MILD Technique 

1.  Set up dream recall 

Before going to bed resolve to wake up and recall dreams during each dream period throughout 
the night (or the first dream period after dawn, or after 6: 00 a. m. or whenever you find 
convenient). 

2.  Recall your dream 

When you awaken from a dream period, no matter what time it is, try to recall as many details 
as possible from your dream. If you find yourself so drowsy that you are drifting back to sleep, 
do something to arouse yourself. 

3.  Focus your intent 

While returning to sleep, concentrate single-mindedly on your intention to remember to 
recognize that you’re dreaming. Tell yourself: “Next time I’m dreaming, I want to remember I’m 
dreaming.” Really try to feel that you mean it. Narrow your thoughts to this idea alone. If you find 
yourself thinking about anything else, just let go of these thoughts and bring your mind back to 
your intention to remember. 

4.  See yourself becoming lucid 

At the same time, imagine that you are back in the dream from which you have just awakened, 
but this time you recognize that it is a dream. Find a dreamsign in the experience; when you see 
it say to yourself: “I’m dreaming!” and continue your fantasy. For example, you might decide that 
when you are lucid you want to fly. In that case, imagine yourself taking off and flying as soon as 
you come to the point in your fantasy that you “realize” you are dreaming. 

5.  Repeat 

Repeat Steps 3 and 4 until your intention is set, then let yourself fall asleep. If, while falling 
asleep, you find yourself thinking of anything else, repeat the procedure so that the last thing in 
your mind before falling asleep is your intention to remember to recognize the next time you are 
dreaming. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Commentary 

If all goes well, you’ll fall asleep and find yourself in a dream, at which point you’ll remember to 
notice that you are dreaming. 

If it takes you a long time to fall asleep while practicing this method, don’t worry: The longer 
you’re awake, the more likely you are to have a lucid dream when you eventually return to 
sleep. This is because the longer you are awake, the more times you will repeat the MILD 
procedure, reinforcing your intention to have a lucid dream. Furthermore, the wakefulness may 
activate your brain, making lucidity easier to attain. 

In fact, if you are a very deep sleeper, you should get up after memorizing your dream and 
engage in ten to fifteen minutes of any activity requiring full wakefulness. Turn on the light and 
read a book. Get out of bed and go into another room. One of the best things to do is to write 
out your dream and read it over, noting all dreamsigns, in preparation for the MILD visualization. 

Many people meet with success after only one or two nights of MILD; others take longer. 
Continued practice of MILD can lead to greater proficiency at lucid dreaming. Many of our 
advanced oneironauts have used it to cultivate the ability to have several lucid dreams any night 
they choose. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
