WILD, without a shadow of a doubt, is one of the better and most powerful lucid dream 
induction methods. WILD is basically carrying your awareness from wake state to the 
dream state. Needless to say it's a difficult task, and beginners have several problems 
inducing a lucid dream using WILD. Here in this post, I'll describe some tricks, tips and 
adjustments for a successful WILD.  

Note: This is not a WILD tutorial, it is a collection of tricks, tips and adjustments based 
on my previous experiments and experiences with lucid dreaming and WILD.  

1: WILD + WBTB = WIN  

Most of beginners try to induce a lucid dream using WILD method when going to bed, 
most probably you'll never have a lucid dream this way, because dreams are generally 
formed during the REM phase of sleep (picture), which occurs after 45-180 minutes of 
sleep. So trying to induce a lucid dream using WILD when going to sleep like is waiting 
for a bus at the bus stop an hour before the bus arrives. Chances are you'll fall asleep 
at the bus stop. The proper way of performing WILD is:  

•  Set your alarm clock to wake you up after approximately 5 hours of sleep.  

•  Get up, don't turn on computer or TV (to maintain a good level of melatonin). 

Read a book, or your dream journal.  

•  After 45-60 minutes, return to your bed. The most vivid dreams will be ready for 

you.  

2: Relaxation  

Relaxation is very important in WILD. If you're not properly relaxed, your body will take 
additional time to fall asleep. Some good relaxation techniques are:  

•  Do stretch exercises during day time.  

• 

• 

(when in bed) Imagine yourself floating in zero gravity vacuum.  

Imagine yourself moving at the speed of light.  

•  Focus on the part of the body your want to relax, and imagine it releasing it's 

weight.  

•  Use of relaxation music for stimulating your muscles and brain. Classical, 

piano, flute, violin and cello recommended.  

3: The Hypnagogia  

After a few minutes of relaxation, you have to concentrate on your breathing or 
heartbeat. Within minutes you'll start seeing random patterns of light in the dark of 
your eyelids, known as hypnagogic imagery. You may also hear sounds, and feel 
sensations all over you body. It's completely normal, if you panic, chances are you'll 
wake your physical body and you'll need to start over.  

I don't see any hypnagogic imagery, what am I doing wrong?  

There are three possible reasons for not seeing hypnagogic imagery: A: Your brain is 
still not in the REM or pre-REM (NREM 3-2) phase. That means you ignored my first tip. 
B: Your body is still awake, that means you ignored my second tip. C: You're too alert 
(or excited) to induce the REM phase and/or deceive your brain to make your body fall 
asleep.  

4: Natural Reflexes  

Natural spasms, jerks and reflexes don't usually mess with the WILD. However if 
you're about to enter the REM, and suddenly you start breathing heavy (because of the 
excitement or panic), you'll most probably ruin your attempt at WILD. The most 
challenging reflex for me was the "saliva swallowing reflex". Hundreds of times I was 
about to enter the final REM, but then I swallowed and returned to the NREM phase. 
Later I started sleeping on my shoulder instead of back, this pretty much helped the 
saliva make its way down naturally. The key is not to fight the reflex, but to let it pass. 
With time and regular practice, you'll gain control over your reflexes too.  

5: Stay Awake  

If you fall asleep every time performing WILD, try the following methods descried 
below:  

•  Keep your forearm raised perpendicular to the bed, and the body.  

•  Change your default sleeping position.  

•  Try sleeping on a couch, or on a different bed.  

6: Entering The Dream  

If you performed all the steps correctly and maintained your awareness to the REM 
phase, you'll start seeing more complex hypnagogic imagery (usually 3D). Once you 
start seeing it, do not try to interact with it for a while. After a few minutes, when the 
imagery gets more stable and clear, imagine yourself (from a first person view) in 
there, and .. you're there!  

7: Sleep Paralysis  

If you get caught in a sleep paralysis before/during/after performing WILD, all you have 
to do is stay calm and concentrate on your breathing. You would not be able to move 
any part of your body, except eyes (in most cases, a number of muscles can be 
moved). If you try to move you body, and break the sleep paralysis, you would 
unintentionally activate the part of your brain responsible for hallucinations. It could 
be anything, from gorgeous ponies eating your bed sheet, to your brain trolling you 
hard by making a 3D thriller right there in your bedroom. If you simply concentrate on 
your breathing, instead of thinking hard about all the horror movies you've seen in 
past, most likely you won't hallucinate.  

The key is to stay calm, and let your brain know, who is the boss!  

8: Stabilization  

Wouldn't it be frustrating if your lucidity lasted only a minute or two, after almost half 
an hour of successful WILD induction? You bet. Check out my previous post for dream 
stabilization.  

9: Ending A Dream  

It is highly recommended to wake up after 30-40 minutes of dreaming. However if you 
continue, most probably you'll forget 80% of your dream when you wake up. After 
waking up, do not go back to sleep for at least 2 hours. If you do, all you would 
remember is a faint memory of a successful WILD induction.  

If WILD didn't work for you, don't lose your hope on lucid dreaming. There are many 
other methods of lucid dreaming, as powerful as WILD, VILD, is one of them. Check 
out my previous post on VILD here.  

Glad to help. Thanks.  

 
